
--- Page 1 ---
Commentary
Human Development 2022;66:149–157
Neurodiversity as Politics
Ari Ne’eman  a, b, c    Elizabeth Pellicano  d, e
aPhD Program in Health Policy, Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, USA;  
bHarvard Law School Project on Disability, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA; cLurie Institute for  
Disability Policy, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA; dMacquarie School of Education, Macquarie  
University, Sydney, NSW, Australia; eDepartment of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University  
College London, London, UKReceived: March 15, 2022
Accepted: March 18, 2022
Published online: March 25, 2022 
Correspondence to: 
Ari Ne’eman, aneeman  @  g.harvard.edu© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel Karger@karger.com
www.karger.com/hdeDOI: 10.1159/000524277
Keywords
Advocacy · Autism · Disability · Movement · Neurodiversity
The debate around neurodiversity is itself diverse. As 
Dwyer (2022) puts it in his own contribution to this spe -
cial issue of Human Development, there are multiple “neu -
rodiversity approaches” deployed differently by different 
actors to different ends, even within the movement. This 
diversity presents some opportunities, allowing different 
groups to adapt the idea for their own purposes. Nonethe -
less, it can also lead to confusion, co-optation, acrimony, 
and other unintended consequences.
As such, in our commentary, we seek to situate the pa-
pers within the broader debate around neurodiversity, 
with the aim of highlighting key areas in which different 
voices within the neurodiversity movement hold diver-
gent viewpoints. We also offer our own views as to how 
to resolve these conflicts, although our intent is to en-
courage debate and deliberate decision-making between 
these different “neurodiversity approaches” (the recogni-
tion of which represents a major contribution by Dwyer), 
not to insist that the movement’s future can only have one 
path. In highlighting these fissures, we hope to set the 
stage for a more robust dialogue on the future of neuro-
diversity in activism, academia, and beyond.Origins
The neurodiversity movement first emerged in the 
1990s as a response to the excesses of traditional autism 
advocacy. Though the term would come later, the move-
ment’s origins date back to Sinclair’s (1993) seminal 1993 
essay “Don’t Mourn for Us,” encouraging parents to shift 
their approach to their child’s autism away from cure and 
towards acceptance. Sinclair contended that parent-led 
autism groups encouraged “mourning for what never 
was” rather than “exploration of what is.” In so doing, 
Sinclair set the stage for a radical challenge to conven-
tional autism discourse. “Don’t Mourn for Us” did not 
just represent a break from the dominant parent-centric 
autism narratives – it also broke from the limited role 
available to autistic persons in public discussion.
As Pripas-Kapit (2020) notes in one of the few aca-
demic explorations of neurodiversity’s founding text, 
Sinclair’s immediate predecessors took a very different 
approach, typically limiting themselves to first-person 
narrative rather than ethical or political critique. Autistic 
authors and public speakers like Temple Grandin spoke 
predominantly to non-autistic audiences, parents, and 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7687-1265, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-
7246-8003Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
评论
Human Development 2022;66:149–157
神经多样性作为政治
Ari Ne’eman  a,b,c    Elizabeth Pellicano  d,e
a哈佛文理研究生院健康政策博士项目，美国马萨诸塞州剑桥；b哈佛法学院残障项目，哈佛大学，美
国马萨诸塞州剑桥；cLurie残障政策研究所，布兰代斯大学，美国马萨诸塞州沃尔瑟姆；d麦考瑞教
育学院，麦考瑞大学，澳大利亚新南威尔士州悉尼；e临床、教育与健康心理学系，伦敦大学学院，
英国伦敦收稿日期：2022年3月15日接受日期：
2022年3月18日在线发表日期：
2022年3月25日
通讯作者：AriNe’eman,
aneeman @  g.harvard.edu©2022S.KargerAG,巴塞尔 Karger@karger.com
www.karger.com/hdeDOI:10.1159/000524277
关键词
Advocacy · Autism · Disability · Movement · Neurodiversity
围绕神经多样性的讨论本身就具有多样性。正如
Dwyer（2022）在他为这期《人类发展》特刊撰写的
文章中所言，即便在该运动内部，也存在多种由不同
行动者为实现不同目的而采取的不同“神经多样性路
径”。这种多样性带来了一些机遇，使得不同群体能
够根据自身需求调整这一理念。然而，它也可能导致
困惑、概念被挪用、激烈争执以及其他非预期的后果。
因此，在我们的评论中，我们试图将这些论文
置于围绕神经多样性的更广泛辩论中，旨在突显神
经多样性运动内部不同声音持有分歧观点的关键领
域。我们也提出了自己关于如何解决这些冲突的看
法，尽管我们的意图是鼓励这些不同的“神经多样
性路径”（承认这些路径是Dwyer的一项主要贡献）
之间进行辩论和审慎决策，而非坚持认为该运动的
未来只能有一条道路。通过突显这些分歧，我们希
望能为在行动主义、学术界及其他领域就神经多样
性的未来展开更坚实的对话奠定基础。起源
神经多样性运动最初兴起于20世纪90年代，是对传
统孤独谱系倡导中过激行为的回应。尽管这个术语出现较
晚，但该运动的起源可追溯至Sinclair（1993）1993年的
开创性文章《不要为我们哀悼》，该文鼓励父母将对孩子
孤独谱系的态度从寻求治愈转向接纳。Sinclair认为，家
长主导的孤独谱系团体鼓励的是“为从未存在的事物哀悼”，
而非“探索当下的现实”。通过此举，Sinclair为挑战传
统的孤独谱系话语奠定了激进的基础。《不要为我们哀悼》
不仅代表了对当时占主导地位的、以家长为中心的孤独谱
系叙事的突破——它也打破了孤独谱系群体在公共讨论中
所能扮演的有限角色。
正如Pripas‑Kapit（2020）在对神经多样性奠基
文本为数不多的学术探讨中指出的那样，Sinclair的
直接先驱们采取了截然不同的方法，通常局限于第一
人称叙述，而非伦理或政治批判。像Temple
Grandin这样的孤独谱系作者和公众演讲者，主要面
向非孤独谱系听众、父母以及
https://orcid.org/0000‑0001‑7687‑1265,https://orcid.org/0000‑0002‑
7246‑8003
--- Page 2 ---
Ne’eman/Pellicano Human Development 2022;66:149–157150
DOI: 10.1159/000524277professionals. Though Sinclair engaged in some similar 
public speaking, “Don’t Mourn for Us” also represented 
something new: a rebuke of parent autism spaces from an 
autistic adult, speaking on behalf of a broader commu-
nity. When Sinclair wrote that xe invited parents “to look 
at our autism, and look at your grief, from our perspec-
tive,” it was the articulation of a larger critique, emerging 
out of an incipient autistic adult community distinct from 
the more established and powerful autism parent one. As 
other autistic persons responded to the essay and flocked 
to autistic cultural spaces, this community grew and 
evolved.
The early autistic community came together very in-
formally. Gatherings took place predominantly on the 
sidelines of parent conferences and in online listservs, 
both places where autistic adults had begun to seek out 
others like them (Dekker, 1999; Sinclair, 2005, 2010). Au-
tism was still perceived as a condition that impacted chil-
dren – little thought went into the possibility that autistic 
persons eventually grew up. Autism and agency were seen 
as so incompatible with each other that, in the introduc-
tion to Grandin’s 1986 biography Emergence: Labeled Au-
tistic, prominent autism researcher Bernie Rimland de-
scribed Grandin as “a recovered autistic individual” 
(Grandin & Scariano, 1986).
The founding of Autism Network International (ANI), 
the first autistic-run organization, offered an infrastruc-
ture for autistic culture. Under Sinclair’s leadership, ANI 
would organize Autreat, an annual conference run by and 
for autistic adults, for many years (see also its later UK 
counterpart, Autscape; Buckle, 2020). For autistic attend-
ees, Autreat was often the first exposure to “autistic space” 
– an environment in which autistic persons were the 
norm. Not only did Autreat spawn many innovations in 
accessibility for autistic people, including its Color Com-
munications Badge system, it also encouraged autistic 
persons who attended to feel comfortable behaving and 
interacting in the manner most natural to them. As one 
autistic attendee put it, “I feel as if I’m home, among my 
own people, for the first time. I never knew what this was 
until now” (Sinclair, 2005). The sudden (and temporary) 
experience of connection prompted many autistic attend-
ees to compare life in the predominantly non-autistic 
world to that of a diaspora community (Sinclair, 2005, 
2010). Non-autistic attendees often found their brief ex-
perience in majority-autistic space impactful too. As Sin-
clair (2005) put it: “One NT [neurotypical] attendee de-
scribed feeling unsure of how to behave and how to relate 
to people, confused about how to interpret other people’s 
behavior, and anxious that he might offend people with-out realizing it….” In other words, he was able to experi-
ence at Autreat some of the same social confusion and 
discomfort that autistic people frequently experience in 
NT society. (Freedom from Pressures section) 
Such experiences prompted empathy, encouraging 
non-autistic persons to look at autistic culture and ways 
of interaction as more legitimate than they might other-
wise have considered them.
Though the conference never had more than one hun-
dred attendees in any given year, many who came to it 
would go on to play leading roles as the movement grew. 
One of us (A.N.) was inspired to co-found the Autistic 
Self Advocacy Network (ASAN), now the USA’s leading 
autistic-run advocacy group, from such experiences. 
Many other longstanding autistic community leaders had 
Autreat’s immersive communal autistic experience as 
their starting point. Over time, ANI and Autreat would 
serve as a seed for a growing and powerful social move-
ment, as autistic people expressed growing frustration 
with the cure- and tragedy-oriented narratives promoted 
by groups like Autism Speaks and others (Heilker & Yer-
geau, 2011; Kras, 2010). What began on the fringe would 
soon be pushed into the mainstream, led by a growing 
cohort of autistic-run advocacy groups working to ad-
vance neurodiversity at the local, national, and interna-
tional level.
This history is important to bear in mind as neurodi -
versity attracts growing interest. Today, the term neuro -
diversity yields thousands of results on Google Scholar. A 
growing number of universities boast neurodiversity ini -
tiatives, typically focused on some combination of re -
search into neurological disability and supporting greater 
access to higher education. Major international corpora -
tions like Ernst & Young and Microsoft boast “neurodi -
versity hiring programs” that recruit autistic jobseekers as 
well as others with neurological disabilities (Ernst & 
Young, n.d.; Microsoft, n.d.). In December 2020, the US 
federal government welcomed the first participants in the 
Neurodiverse Federal Workforce pilot program (Thomas, 
2021). Neurodiversity is still far from dominant, even in 
the context of autism (Leadbitter et al., 2021; Pellicano & 
den Houting, 2022), but it has firmly entered the cultural 
mainstream, with the concept referred to frequently by 
parents and professionals alongside the autistic persons 
who first initiated it. Furthermore, autistic people them -
selves have built infrastructure in the form of advocacy 
groups, cultural convenings, and even businesses oriented 
around the movement’s ideas and larger philosophy.
This growth is in many ways beneficial, but it also pres-
ents challenges. Neurodiversity emerged in a relatively Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
Ne’eman/Pellicano 《人类发展》2022；66：149–157150
DOI：10.1159/000524277专家们。尽管Sinclair也进行过一些类似的公开演讲，但
《不要为我们哀悼》也代表了一些新的东西：这是一位成
年孤独谱系个体代表更广泛的群体，对孤独谱系儿童家长
空间的驳斥。当Sinclair写道，xe邀请家长们“从我们的
视角来看待我们的孤独谱系，以及你们的悲痛”时，这阐
明了一种更广泛的批判，它源于一个新兴的、与更为成熟
且强大的孤独谱系儿童家长群体截然不同的成年孤独谱系
个体社群。随着其他孤独谱系群体对这篇文章做出回应并
涌入孤独谱系文化空间，这个社群不断发展演变。
早期的孤独谱系社群是以非常非正式的方式聚集起来
的。聚会主要发生在家长会议的边缘地带以及在线邮件列
表中，在这两个地方，成年孤独谱系个体已经开始寻找同
类（Dekker,1999;Sinclair,2005,2010）。当时，孤独
谱系仍被视为一种主要影响儿童的状况——人们很少考虑
孤独谱系群体最终会长大的可能性。孤独谱系与能动性被
视为如此互不相容，以至于在Grandin1986年传记《浮现：
被标记为孤独谱系》的引言中，著名的孤独谱系研究者
BernieRimland将Grandin描述为“一位已康复的孤独
谱系个体”（Grandin&Scariano,1986）。
孤独谱系国际网络（ANI）作为首个由孤独谱系群体
自身运营的组织，其创立为孤独谱系文化提供了基础设施。
在Sinclair的领导下，ANI多年来一直组织着Autreat——
一个由成年孤独谱系个体举办、并为成年孤独谱系个体服
务的年度会议（另见其后来的英国对应活动Autscape；
Buckle，2020年）。对于与会的孤独谱系群体而言，
Autreat通常是他们首次接触“孤独谱系空间”——一个以
孤独谱系群体为常态的环境。Autreat不仅催生了许多针
对孤独谱系群体的无障碍创新，包括其彩色沟通徽章系统，
还鼓励参会的孤独谱系群体以对他们而言最自然的方式舒
适地行为和互动。正如一位孤独谱系与会者所说：“我感
觉好像回到了家，第一次和我自己人在一起。直到现在我
才知道这是什么感觉”（Sinclair，2005年）。这种突然
（且暂时）的连接体验促使许多孤独谱系与会者将生活在
以非孤独谱系为主的世界比作散居社群的生活（Sinclair，
2005年，2010年）。非孤独谱系的与会者也常常发现他们
在以孤独谱系群体为主的空间中的短暂经历同样影响深远。
正如Sinclair（2005年）所言：“一位神经典型[神经典型
] 与会者描述说，他感到不确定该如何行为和与人相处，
对如何解读他人的行为感到困惑，并担心自己可能在无意
识中冒犯他人——没有意识到....”换句话说，他在Autreat得以体验
到一些孤独谱系群体在神经典型社会中经常经历的
社会性困惑与不适。（《远离压力》章节）
这样的经历促生了共情，鼓励非孤独谱系人士以
比他们原本可能认为的更合理的方式来看待孤独谱系
文化及其互动方式。
尽管该会议在任一年份的参会人数从未超过一百人，
但随着运动的发展，许多与会者后来都成为了领军人物。
我们中的一位（A.N.）正是受此经历启发，共同创立了孤
独谱系自我倡导网络（ASAN），该组织现已成为美国领
先的由孤独谱系群体主导的倡导团体。许多其他资深的孤
独谱系社群领袖，其起点便是Autreat所提供的沉浸式共
同体孤独谱系体验。随着时间的推移，ANI和Autreat成
为了一场不断壮大且具有影响力的社会运动的种子，因为
孤独谱系群体对诸如AutismSpeaks等组织所宣扬的以
“治愈”和悲剧为核心的叙事表达了日益增长的不满（
Heilker&Yergeau,2011;Kras,2010）。这股始于边缘
的力量，在一批日益壮大的、由孤独谱系群体主导的倡导
团体的领导下，致力于在地方、国家和国际层面推进神经
多样性，很快便被推入了主流。
这段历史在神经多样性日益受到关注之际，值得铭
记。如今，在GoogleScholar上搜索“神经多样性”
一词，会得到数千条结果。越来越多的大学吹捧其神经
多样性倡议，这些倡议通常侧重于神经系统障碍研究和
支持更多人接受高等教育的某种结合。像安永和微软这
样的国际大型企业，也吹嘘其“神经多元招聘计划”，
招募孤独谱系求职者以及其他有神经障碍的人士（
Ernst&Young,n.d.;Microsoft,n.d.）。2020年
12月，美国联邦政府迎来了神经多元联邦劳动力试点项
目的第一批参与者（Thomas,2021）。神经多样性远
未占据主导地位，即使在孤独谱系的语境中也是如此
（Leadbitter等人，2021；Pellicano&den
Houting，2022），但它已稳固地进入了文化主流，
这一概念不仅被最初发起它的孤独谱系群体频繁提及，
也常被家长和专业人士引用。此外，孤独谱系群体自身
已围绕该运动的理念和更宏大的哲学，建立了包括倡导
团体、文化聚会乃至企业在内的基础设施。
这种增长在许多方面是有益的，但也带来了挑战。神
经多样性起源于一个相对
--- Page 3 ---
Neurodiversity as Politics151
Human Development 2022;66:149–157
DOI: 10.1159/000524277tight-knit community without an extensive written re-
cord or much engagement with academia. As we see it, 
over time, as the specific terminology of the original com-
munity has been incorporated into the work of those with 
more social, cultural, and economic capital (both inside 
and outside the autistic community), the movement’s ter-
minology has been deployed to new purposes.
Often, terms that meant one thing to the activists that 
spawned them have been used very differently by aca-
demics and business leaders. Ambiguity about the “true” 
meaning of neurodiversity has at times meant that differ-
ent voices within the movement have sought to confi-
dently present their own views as the only authentic rep-
resentation. This ambiguity can also prompt newcomers 
to adopt and even insist upon positions that would have 
been alien to or extreme to those who cultivated neurodi-
versity’s roots (e.g., rejection of autism as a disability or 
an espousal of unspecified autistic superpowers; see den 
Houting, 2019). Uncertainty over what the movement 
stands for has at times prompted observers to attack neu-
rodiversity proponents for views they by and large do not 
hold. Much of the present-day debate over neurodiver-
sity is akin to a game of telephone, with many attacking 
or praising ideas or usages that are very different from 
what their interlocuters intend. Inevitable as this may be, 
discussions of neurodiversity would benefit from aware-
ness of these tensions and the challenges they present.
Neurodiversity as a Descriptive Term or Ideology?
One of the more basic questions that emerges in con-
sidering neurodiversity is one of terminology: is neurodi-
versity the name of a social movement, a simple biological 
reality (reflecting the existence of multiple kinds of 
brains), or both? As Chapman (2020) notes, some have 
defined the movement exclusively in political terms while 
others have sought to frame neurodiversity as a descrip-
tive fact. Walker (2014) argues that neurodiversity refers 
to “the diversity of human minds, the infinite variation in 
neurocognitive functioning within our species… Neuro-
diversity is a biological fact. It’s not a perspective, an ap-
proach, a belief, a political position, or a paradigm.” 
Walker goes on to argue that the political implications of 
neurodiversity should be referred to as the “neurodiver-
sity paradigm,” distinguishing the normative implica-
tions from the biological fact.
Though framed as the authoritative pronouncement 
of the movement, this perspective is far from the only 
point of view in autistic activist circles. Many autistic ac-tivists have framed neurodiversity as an explicitly politi-
cal position in both communications to the broader com-
munity and the academic literature, referring to neurodi-
versity as “acceptance for neurological differences and 
disabilities” (Durbin-Westby, 2012) or explicitly framing 
it as an “alternative perspective… in contrast to the deficit 
model” (Robertson, 2010) rather than a simple biological 
reality. This tension is present even within this issue – for 
example, contrast Zajic and Brown’s (2022) reference to 
“neurodiversity proponents” and “neurodiversity advo-
cates” (consistent with the use of the term to describe an 
ideology) with Radulski’s (2022) reference to neurodiver-
sity as a “field” (consistent with the descriptive tradition 
of the term). In contrast to Walker, we believe that the use 
of the word neurodiversity, without further qualifiers, has 
a long history of being used in autistic activist communi-
ties to describe biology and ideology, with some believing 
the term refers only to one of these options and others 
applying it to both. Recognizing that others may adopt 
different conventions, in this article we use the term ex-
clusively to describe the ideology for reasons we now ar-
ticulate.
In principle, the distinction is mere semantics. But in 
practice, the existence of neurodiversity as a purely de-
scriptive concept removes from the term its most impor-
tant implications. For better or worse, if neurodiversity 
refers simply to the fact of neurological variation, there is 
no inherent reason for the term not to be used in associa-
tion with efforts to cure or prevent autism or other similar 
neurological disabilities. Similarly, this descriptive neu-
rodiversity is perfectly consistent with advertising analo-
gizing autism or other similar conditions as akin to death 
or kidnapping, precisely the type of messaging the move-
ment sought to combat in its early years (Heilker & Yer-
geau, 2011; Kras, 2010; Rottier & Gernsbacher, 2020). If 
the term neurodiversity has no normative implications, 
there is no basis to object to the way it is deployed in such 
contexts.
Efforts to draw a finely grained distinction between 
“neurodiversity” and the “neurodiversity paradigm” are 
also likely too subtle for most activist and advocacy con-
texts, particularly given the imperative for autistic and 
other disabled activists to keep their language accessible 
to a broad audience, including persons with cognitive im-
pairments and without access to higher education. If the 
“center of gravity” for the neurodiversity movement is to 
stay in the realm of activism rather than in academia, 
these issues must be considered.
These questions also raise another important concern: 
the appropriateness of the increasingly common use of Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
神经多样性作为政治议题151
《人类发展》2022;66:149–157DOI:
10.1159/000524277紧密的社群，当时缺乏详尽的书面记录，也较少与
学术界互动。在我们看来，随着时间的推移，原社
群特有的术语已被那些拥有更多社会、文化和经济
资本的人（无论其身处孤独谱系社群内外）纳入其
工作中，这场运动的术语已被用于新的目的。
通常，那些对催生它们的活动家而言具有特定含义
的术语，被学术界和商界领袖以截然不同的方式使用。
关于神经多样性“真实”含义的模糊性，有时意味着运
动内部的不同声音都试图自信地将其个人观点呈现为唯
一真实的代表。这种模糊性也可能促使新来者采纳、甚
至坚持那些对于培育神经多样性根基的人们而言是陌生
或极端的立场（例如，拒绝将孤独谱系视为一种残疾，
或拥护未加说明的孤独谱系超能力；参见den
Houting，2019）。对于该运动所代表理念的不确定性，
有时会促使观察者攻击神经多样性的支持者，指责他们
持有其大体上并不认同的观点。当下许多关于神经多样
性的辩论，类似于一场传话游戏，许多人攻击或赞扬的
观点或用法，与其对话者本意相去甚远。尽管这可能不
可避免，但对神经多样性的讨论若能意识到这些张力及
其带来的挑战，将大有裨益。
神经多样性是描述性术语还是意识形态？
在思考神经多样性时，一个更基本的问题涉及术语：
神经多样性是一个社会运动的名称，是一种简单的生物
现实（反映了多种大脑类型的存在），还是两者兼而有
之？正如Chapman（2020）所指出的，有些人完全从
政治角度定义这一运动，而另一些人则试图将神经多样
性框定为一种描述性事实。Walker（2014）认为，神
经多样性指的是“人类思维的多样性，即我们物种内部
神经认知功能的无限变异⋯⋯神经多样性是一个生物学
事实。它不是一种观点、一种方法、一种信念、一种政
治立场或一种范式。”Walker进一步主张，神经多样
性的政治含义应被称为“神经多样性范式”，从而将规
范性含义与生物学事实区分开来。
尽管这一观点被塑造成该运动的权威宣言，但在孤独
谱系活动家圈子里，它远非唯一的观点。许多孤独谱系活‑动家将神经多样性明确界定为一种政治立场，无论是在
与更广泛社区的沟通中，还是在学术文献里，都将神经
多样性称为“对神经学差异和残疾的接纳”（
Durbin‑Westby,2012），或明确将其描述为“一种
替代视角⋯⋯与缺陷模型相对”（Robertson,2010），
而非简单的生物学现实。这种张力在本期内容中亦有体
现——例如，对比Zajic和Brown（2022）提及的“神
经多样性支持者”和“神经多样性倡导者”（与将该术
语用于描述一种意识形态的用法一致）与Radulski
（2022）将神经多样性称为一个“领域”的提法（与
该术语的描述性传统一致）。与Walker的观点不同，
我们认为，“神经多样性”一词不加限定地使用，在孤
独谱系活动家社区中有着悠久的历史，既用来描述生物
学事实，也用来描述意识形态；有些人认为该术语仅指
其中一种含义，而另一些人则将其应用于两者。我们认
识到他人可能采用不同的惯例，在本文中，出于我们将
要阐述的原因，我们使用该术语专指这种意识形态。
原则上，这种区分仅仅是语义上的。但在实践中，
将神经多样性作为一个纯粹描述性概念的存在，却剥离
了这个术语最重要的内涵。无论如何，如果神经多样性
仅仅指神经学上存在差异这一事实，那么该术语就没有
内在理由不能与旨在治愈或预防孤独谱系或其他类似神
经障碍的努力相关联。同样，这种描述性的神经多样性
与那些将孤独谱系或其他类似状况类比为死亡或绑架的
广告宣传完全相容，而这正是该运动早期试图对抗的信
息类型（Heilker&Yergeau,2011;Kras,2010;
Rottier&Gernsbacher,2020）。如果神经多样性这
一术语没有规范性内涵，就没有理由反对它在这些语境
中的使用方式。
试图在“神经多样性”与“神经多样性范式”
之间做出精细区分的努力，对于大多数行动主义和
倡导语境而言也可能过于微妙，特别是考虑到孤独
谱系人士及其他残障活动者必须确保其语言能为广
大受众所理解，包括有认知障碍和未接受高等教育
的人群。如果神经多样性运动的“重心”要保持在
行动主义领域而非学术界，就必须考虑这些问题。
这些问题也引出了另一个重要的关切点：越来越普
遍地使用
--- Page 4 ---
Ne’eman/Pellicano Human Development 2022;66:149–157152
DOI: 10.1159/000524277terms like “neurodivergent” or “neurodiverse,” both of 
which are often used to describe those for whom the con-
cept of neurodiversity applies, though proponents of the 
former argue the latter is grammatically nonsensical. 
These terms emerged in large part out of a desire to clar-
ify that the term neurodiversity in either its descriptive or 
ideological terms applies outside of autism (Asasumasu, 
2016; Chapman, 2021). But their usage presents a new 
problem: neurodiversity activists have long emphasized 
the connection between their movement and the broader 
disability community, explicitly rejecting claims that the 
movement “views autism as a difference but not a disabil-
ity” (Bailin, 2019; den Houting, 2019; Ne’eman & Bas-
com, 2020). We agree with this interpretation of the 
movement’s political commitments.
However, the usage of neurodiversity as a descriptive 
term seems to imply a fear of the term disability. Why not 
simply refer to this population as the neurologically or 
(where appropriate) developmentally disabled? What 
purpose does the additional descriptive term have, if au-
tistic people and other “neurodivergent” persons are def-
initionally disabled as well? Returning to the idea that a 
movement that centers activists (rather than solely aca-
demics) and that seeks to include persons with cognitive 
disabilities must be attentive to the most likely possible 
interpretation of its terminology, we wonder if the grow-
ing usage of terms like “neurodivergent” has confused 
matters.
After all, the commonsense interpretation of the cre-
ation of a special word to refer to neurological disability 
is that those who engage in such an act of creation find 
the latter term unacceptable in some way. While the ac-
cusation that neurodiversity proponents do not see au-
tism as a disability is often made in bad faith, the increas-
ing prominence of the descriptive use of the term neuro-
diversity makes this a more understandable error. It may 
even represent an accurate description of what motivates 
some persons to adopt the language of neurodiversity, 
even if this view is not prominent among movement lead-
ers or organizations.
Sinclair and other early autistic activists were heavily 
influenced by other parts of the disability community. 
Autistic culture borrowed significantly from Deaf culture 
– for example, attendees at Autreat substituted tradition-
al applause for “flapplause,” the rapid flapping of one’s 
hands instead of clapping them together. This has much 
in common with “deaf applause,” which typically involves 
hand waving (Solvang & Haualand, 2014). Similarly, 
much of the ideology and terminology of the neurodiver-
sity movement borrows from the independent living movement and the developmental disability self-advoca-
cy movement, both of which emphasize the same themes 
of self-help and willingness to push back against profes-
sional and family member domination in the political 
sphere.
This disconnect from the larger disability context in 
which neurodiversity was born is a grave error. Neurodi-
versity proponents would do well to avoid “reinventing 
the wheel” in a way that might imply a rejection of the 
broader disability rights movement. As we shall shortly 
discuss, there are areas in which neurodiversity ideals add 
concepts that build upon and are (at the moment) distinct 
from broader disability rights ideologies. However, when 
describing concepts for which terminology exists in the 
larger disability realm, it may make more sense to rely on 
them.
For example, Radulski’s (2022) contribution offers an 
important exploration of neurodiversity activism against 
the demand that autistic people mask autistic traits, syn-
thesizing the literature on the harmful impacts of “cam-
ouflaging” in autism with important concepts from liter-
ary, feminist, and disability theory. In so doing, Radulski 
makes use of terms like “neuroarchy” and “neurominor-
ity” to describe the experiences autistic people face living 
as social minorities in a majority-neurotypical world. 
While we agree that Radulski’s invoking of the concept of 
“neurotypical privilege” represents an important applica-
tion of the idea of privilege to the world of autism, we 
wonder about the wisdom of terms like “neurominority,” 
which introduce new and somewhat exceptionalist lan-
guage to describe concepts with long histories in broader 
disability activism. Where an idea is unique to the neuro-
diversity context, it may require new terminology. But 
where it does not, neurodiversity activists may benefit 
from looking for more accessible language that connects 
to the movements’ roots in the larger world of disability.
Defining the Boundaries of the Movement
Alongside the question of what the word neurodiver-
sity means is the even more crucial question of who it ap-
plies to. Though neurodiversity has its origins in the 
world of autism, it has important implications outside of 
it as well (Bertilsdotter Rosqvist et al., 2020; Gillespie-
Lynch et al., 2020). As Botha and Gillespie-Lynch (2022) 
note, in various contexts, conditions like ADHD, dyslex-
ia, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, intellectual disability, 
and many others have been asserted to fall under the neu-
rodiversity umbrella. At times these claims have been Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
Ne’eman/Pellicano 《人类发展》2022；66：149–157152
DOI：10.1159/000524277诸如“神经殊异”或“神经多元”这类术语是否恰当，这
两个术语常被用来描述神经多样性概念所适用的人群，尽
管前者的支持者认为后者在语法上毫无意义。这些术语的
出现，很大程度上源于一种澄清的愿望：即神经多样性这
一术语，无论是其描述性还是意识形态层面的含义，都适
用于孤独谱系之外的情形（Asasumasu,2016;
Chapman,2021）。但它们的用法带来了一个新问题：神
经多样性活动家长期以来一直强调他们的运动与更广泛的
残障社群之间的联系，并明确拒绝那种认为该运动“将孤
独谱系视为一种差异而非残障”的说法（Bailin,2019;
denHouting,2019;Ne’eman&Bascom,2020）。我
们赞同对这场运动政治承诺的这种解读。
然而，将神经多样性用作描述性术语，似乎暗
示了对‘残障’一词的恐惧。为什么不直接称这一
群体为神经系统障碍者，或（在适当情况下）发展
性残障者呢？既然自闭症人士和其他‘神经殊异’
者在定义上也属于残障群体，那么增加一个描述性
术语有何目的？回到这样一个观点：一个以活动家
（而非仅学者）为核心、并力求包容认知残障人士
的运动，必须关注其术语最可能被如何解读。我们
不禁怀疑，‘神经殊异’等术语日益广泛的使用是
否反而混淆了问题。
毕竟，从常识角度解读，专门创造一个词来指
代神经系统障碍，意味着创造者认为后一个术语在
某种程度上不可接受。尽管指责神经多样性支持者
不将自闭症视为残障的说法常出于恶意，但‘神经
多样性’一词在描述性使用上日益突出，使得这种
误解更易理解。它甚至可能准确地描述了促使某些
人采用神经多样性语言的部分动机，即便这种观点
在运动领袖或组织中并不占主导地位。
Sinclair和其他早期孤独谱系活动者深受残障社
群其他部分的影响。孤独谱系文化大量借鉴了聋人
文化——例如，Autreat的参与者用传统的鼓掌方式
被“拍翅鼓掌”所取代，即快速挥动手掌而非双手
拍击。这与“聋人鼓掌”有很多共同之处，后者通
常涉及挥手动作（Solvang&Haualand,2014）。
同样，神经多样性运动的许多意识形态和术语也借
鉴了独立生活运动以及发展性障碍自我倡导运动，两者都强调自
助和愿意在政治领域抵制专业人士及家庭成员支配
的相同主题。
这种与孕育神经多样性的更广泛残障背景的脱节，
是一个严重的错误。神经多样性的支持者最好避免‘重
新发明轮子’，以免其方式可能暗示对更广泛的残障权
利运动的排斥。正如我们即将讨论的，在某些领域，神
经多样性的理念确实增加了一些概念，这些概念建立在
更广泛的残障权利意识形态之上，并且（目前）与之不
同。然而，在描述那些在更广泛的残障领域中已有术语
的概念时，依赖这些现有术语可能更为明智。
例如，Radulski（2022）的贡献对神经多样性行
动主义进行了一次重要的探讨，旨在反对要求孤独谱系
群体掩饰其孤独谱系特征，将关于‘伪装’在孤独谱系
中有害影响的文献，与文学、女权主义和残障理论中的
重要概念相结合。在此过程中，Radulski使用了诸如
‘神经支配’和‘神经少数群体’等术语来描述孤独谱
系群体在一个神经典型占多数的世界中作为社会少数群
体所面临的经历。虽然我们同意Radulski引入‘神经
典型特权’的概念是将特权观念应用于孤独谱系世界的
重要应用，但我们质疑诸如‘神经少数群体’这类术语
的明智性，它们引入了新的、某种程度上带有例外论色
彩的语言来描述在更广泛的残障行动主义中已有悠久历
史的概念。当一个理念是神经多样性语境所独有的时，
它可能需要新的术语。但在并非如此的情况下，神经多
样性活动家或许可以从寻找更易理解的语言中受益，这
种语言应能连接到运动在更广阔残障世界中的根源。
界定运动的边界
关于“神经多样性”一词含义的讨论，伴随着一个更为关
键的问题：它适用于哪些人。尽管神经多样性起源于孤独谱系
领域，但它在其他方面也具有重要影响（Bertilsdotter
Rosqvist等人，2020；Gillespie‑Lynch等人，2020）。正
如Botha和Gillespie‑Lynch（2022）所指出的，在不同语境
下，诸如注意缺陷多动障碍、阅读障碍、双相情感障碍、精神
分裂症、智力障碍等许多其他状况，都被主张应纳入神经多样
性的范畴。有时这些主张是由
--- Page 5 ---
Neurodiversity as Politics153
Human Development 2022;66:149–157
DOI: 10.1159/000524277made by persons with those conditions, at times by other 
neurodiversity activists seeking to frame the movement 
as maximally inclusive.
Insofar as neurodiversity has exclusively descriptive 
implications, scope is not a difficult question. But if the 
word neurodiversity has any ideological implications 
whatsoever, this becomes a very challenging area for de-
bate, dependent entirely on what the scope of the neuro-
diversity ideology may be.
Some have framed neurodiversity’s ideological com-
mitments as simply the application of the disability rights 
movement in the realm of mental disability. Under this 
definition, neurodiversity’s normative implications are 
the same as those of the broader disability rights move-
ment and thus relate in large part to questions of acces-
sibility and equality of opportunity. From this standpoint, 
taking the broadest possible definition of neurodiversity’s 
“scope” is not only appropriate – it is a moral necessity. 
After all, all persons with disabilities deserve the protec-
tions of non-discrimination and reasonable accommoda-
tion, among others, guaranteed by many national disabil-
ity rights laws and the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
However, others have framed the neurodiversity 
movement as referring specifically to the rejection of the 
demand for typical appearance, cognition, or behavior – 
that is, the movement’s rejection of the goals of preven-
tion and cure. While still rooted in disability rights, this 
definition of neurodiversity layers on top of it, represent-
ing a supplementary ideology with a new additional con-
tribution. Under this definition, defining the boundaries 
of the neurodiversity movement becomes much trickier. 
While there are many diagnoses in which persons with 
the relevant disabilities reject the goal of suppression of 
symptoms, this is not universally the case. For example, 
while autistic repetitive behaviors are generally a source 
of pleasure or self-regulation, in the context of obsessive-
compulsive disorder they are more frequently a source of 
distress (Jiujias et al., 2017; King, 2019; Ne’eman et al., 
2020). Insofar as inclusion within the scope of neurodi-
versity activism implies a rejection of efforts to target, for 
intervention, traits associated with a given disability, 
some degree of selectivity is more appropriate.
While both ways of defining neurodiversity as an ide-
ology are defensible, the latter is the more compelling. By 
making neurodiversity simply the application of disabil-
ity rights in the realm of mental disability, activists gain a 
pithy slogan but lose the ability to refer specifically to the 
movement’s most important innovation: rejection of the 
idea that research and service provision should target pre-vention, cure, or recovery towards normalcy. While this 
idea has some traction in other disability contexts, it is 
generally not as broadly applied – for example, while 
many physical disability activists argue against selective 
abortion and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis to re-
move persons with their disabilities from the gene pool 
(e.g., Asch & Barlevy, 2012), this critique usually does not 
extend to interventions aimed at already existing persons. 
It may be that a common “theory of everything” may be 
developed that allows the neurodiversity’s rejection of 
cure to be integrated seamlessly into all mental and non-
mental disabilities (we discuss one possibility below), but 
until such an idea is articulated and accepted, we believe 
it important to retain language to explain neurodiversi-
ty’s unique contribution. Thus, defining neurodiversity 
through this second, more narrow approach is more ap-
pealing (for now).
Implicitly adopting this definition, Dwyer (2022) dis-
cusses several important considerations for how to define 
“the scope of neurodiversity approaches.” He notes and 
rejects arguments for defining neurodiversity to include 
those conditions that emerge “naturally,” that are associ-
ated with contributions to society, that are congenital (as 
opposed to acquired), and that prompt self-identification 
with the movement’s rejection of cure. This last comes 
closest to an acceptable criterion, but Dwyer justifiably 
rejects it for failing to account for circumstances like an-
orexia, where persons with a diagnosis may dangerously 
seek to reject efforts to ameliorate symptoms. We agree 
with this and add a further critique of relying solely on 
individual self-identification: the need for policymakers 
and researchers to have guidance from a community at 
large. While service-delivery may be approached on a 
largely individualized basis, the allocation of research 
funding and many other areas of public policy often re-
quire engaging with groups as broader communities, de-
spite their considerable heterogeneity.
Another more radical critique of the broadest possible 
application of neurodiversity may be found in the exis-
tence of other challenges to traditional psychiatric prac-
tice. For example, the mental health consumer/psychiat-
ric survivor movement has long emphasized the value of 
“recovery” from mental illness diagnoses as a form of re-
sistance to psychiatrists who reject the possibility of it. Far 
from representing a simple clinical goal, recovery in this 
context has radical implications, often used as the basis to 
push back against involuntary treatment, institutional-
ization, and the long-term denial of legal capacity (Mor-
rison, 2013). In contrast, in the autism context “recovery” 
is a term used by parents and providers seeking to force Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
神经多样性作为政治议题153
《人类发展》2022;66:149–157DOI:
10.1159/000524277患有这些状况的人士提出的，有时则是由其他神经多样性
活动家提出的，他们试图将这场运动构建为尽可能包容的。
只要神经多样性仅具有描述性含义，其范围就不是
一个难题。但如果‘神经多样性’这个词具有任何意识
形态层面的含义，这就成为一个极具挑战性的辩论领域，
完全取决于神经多样性意识形态的范围可能是什么。
一些人将神经多样性的意识形态承诺简单地框
定为残障权利运动在精神残障领域的应用。根据这
一定义，神经多样性的规范性含义与更广泛的残障
权利运动相同，因此在很大程度上涉及无障碍环境
和机会平等的问题。从这个角度看，对神经多样性
的‘范围’采取尽可能宽泛的定义不仅是恰当的——
更是一种道德必需。毕竟，所有残障人士都应享有
非歧视和合理便利等保障，这些权利已得到许多国
家残障权利法律以及联合国《残疾人权利公约》的
保证。
然而，也有人将神经多样性运动具体定义为对
要求具备典型外貌、认知或行为的拒绝——即该运动
对预防和治愈目标的拒绝。虽然这一定义仍植根于
残障权利，但它在基础上增加了一层含义，代表了
一种具有新附加贡献的补充性意识形态。根据这一
定义，界定神经多样性运动的边界变得棘手得多。
虽然存在许多诊断，其中相关残障人士拒绝以抑制
症状为目标，但这并非普遍情况。例如，虽然孤独
谱系的重复行为通常是愉悦或自我调节的来源，但
在强迫症的背景下，它们更常是痛苦的来源（
Jiujias等，2017；King，2019；Ne’eman等，
2020）。只要纳入神经多样性行动主义的范畴意味
着拒绝针对与特定残障相关的特质进行干预，那么
某种程度的选择性就更为合适。
尽管将神经多样性定义为一种意识形态的两种方式
都站得住脚，但后者更具说服力。通过将神经多样性简
单地视为残疾权利在精神残障领域的应用，活动人士获
得了一个精炼的口号，却失去了特指该运动最重要创新
的能力：即拒绝研究和服务提供应以预防、治愈或康复至常态为目标。尽管这一理念在
其他残疾语境中也有一定影响力，但通常并未被广
泛运用——例如，尽管许多肢体残疾活动人士反对通
过选择性堕胎和植入前遗传学诊断来将带有其残疾
的人从基因库中移除（如Asch与Barlevy，2012年），
但这种批评通常并不延伸至针对已存在个体的干预
措施。或许未来会发展出一种通用的“万物理论”，
使神经多样性对治愈的拒斥能够无缝融入所有精神
与非精神残障中（我们将在下文讨论一种可能性），
但在此类理念被阐明和接受之前，我们认为保留解
释神经多样性独特贡献的语言至关重要。因此，目
前来看，通过这第二种更狭义的方式来定义神经多
样性更具吸引力。
Dwyer(2022)在隐含地采纳这一定义的同时，
讨论了如何界定“神经多样性路径的范围”的几个
重要考量。他指出并驳斥了将神经多样性定义为包
含那些“自然”出现的、与社会贡献相关的、先天
性的（而非后天获得的）状况的论点，以及那些促
使个体认同该运动拒绝治愈理念的状况。最后一点
最接近一个可接受的标准，但Dwyer有理由地拒绝
了它，因为它未能考虑到像厌食症这样的情况——被
诊断者可能危险地拒绝任何改善症状的努力。我们
同意这一点，并进一步批评了仅依赖个体自我认同
的做法：政策制定者和研究者需要来自更广泛社区
的指导。虽然服务提供可以在很大程度上以个体化
为基础，但研究资金的分配以及公共政策的许多其
他领域，通常需要与作为更广泛群体的社群进行接
触，尽管它们内部存在显著的异质性。
对于神经多样性最广泛可能应用的另一种更为
激进的批评，可能存在于其他对传统精神病学实践
的挑战中。例如，心理健康服务使用者/精神病学幸
存者运动长期以来一直强调从精神疾病诊断中“康
复”的价值，以此作为对那些否认康复可能性的精
神病学家的抵抗。在这种语境下，康复远非代表一
个简单的临床目标，而是具有激进的意涵，常被用
作抵制非自愿治疗、机构化以及长期剥夺法律行为
能力的依据（Morrison,2013）。相比之下，在孤
独谱系语境中，“康复”一词被寻求迫使
--- Page 6 ---
Ne’eman/Pellicano Human Development 2022;66:149–157154
DOI: 10.1159/000524277autistic persons into looking and acting normal (see Fein 
et al., 2013). Associated with the behaviorist approach to 
autism, neurodiversity activists have long seen the desire 
to “recover” autistic persons as a tool of abusive forms of 
intervention (Autistic Self Advocacy Network, 2013; 
Ne’eman, 2021; Padawar, 2014). In fact, autistic activists 
actively lobbied against the inclusion of “recovery crite-
ria” in the DSM-5 definition of autism (Kapp & Ne’eman, 
2020).
In seeking maximum inclusion, there is a risk that neu-
rodiversity activists may inadvertently practice a sort of 
ideological imperialism: insisting on importing a specific 
critique and worldview into communities with their own, 
pre-existing and incompatible ideological commitments. 
Of course, there are many persons with mental illness 
who do seek to apply neurodiversity to their own condi-
tions (Graby, 2015; Hart, 2020). Such differences of opin-
ion exist in every community – insofar as they can be re-
solved, they are best done so through internal debate and 
disputation within the boundaries of that community it-
self, rather than the imposition of an outside ideology by 
well-meaning allies. As such, we suggest a consideration 
of politics in addition to those ethical factors articulated 
in Dwyer’s discussion of the boundaries of neurodiver-
sity: the neurodiversity movement should seek to make 
itself relevant in those disability communities where a 
sufficient internal constituency exists for the application 
of the ideas of neurodiversity to their condition. Such an 
approach would not require uniform opinion (which 
never exists) or even as much of a consensus as is found 
in autistic community contexts. But it should insist on 
some critical mass of internal support prior to demanding 
from the outside the application of neurodiversity ideals.
This too may be a further argument against the de-
scriptive use of the term neurodiversity – as the use of it 
descriptively to apply to a community that rejects the 
term’s ideological implications may both prompt confu-
sion and justifiable objection that the broadest possible 
application of the term interferes with the self-determi-
nation of other disability communities.
Operationalizing Neurodiversity: What Are the 
Practical Stakes?
Whatever its definition and scope, the most important 
practical question regarding neurodiversity is what it 
means on the ground. This special issue includes a num-
ber of important explorations of this concept. In docu-
menting the #TakeTheMaskOff social media campaign, Radulski (2022) highlights the tremendous day-to-day 
stakes autistic people face as a minority living in a world 
that is often hostile to autistic ways of being, forcing onto 
autistic persons passing demands akin to those experi-
enced by racial and ethnic minorities and other oppressed 
peoples. Zajic and Brown (2022) provide an interesting 
exploration of the implications of neurodiversity ideas on 
the teaching of writing, exploring what neurodiversity 
might mean for the teaching of writing and research on 
the development of autistic writing skills. Botha and Gil-
lespie-Lynch (2022) explore the intersection of autism 
and other disability communities to which the ideas of 
neurodiversity have been applied with other forms of 
marginalized identity. In doing so, they draw on a rich 
literature on the intersectional impacts of marginaliza-
tion to better understand autistic identity development 
and community building, key building blocks for neuro-
diversity movement activism.
Dwyer (2022) provides a useful theoretical discussion 
of various approaches neurodiversity could take in op-
erationalizing its ideology for practical service-provision 
purposes. Ultimately, he argues for an interactionist ap-
proach to neurodiversity, which recognizes that challeng-
es emerge from the combination of impairment and en-
vironment. (Although he contrasts this with the British 
“strong” social model of disability, we note that this ap-
proach is consistent with the colloquial use of the social 
model in the USA and how it was understood by many 
early autistic activists who contributed to the develop-
ment of neurodiversity ideas.) In the interactionist ap-
proach advocated by Dwyer, interventions could target 
either modifying society or modifying individual traits 
(or both), but should do so based on which ultimately en-
hances quality of life rather than based on what is deemed 
to “cause” an underlying challenge. There is much merit 
to this approach, which seems to have as a necessary im-
plication an abandonment of the tendency – still so com-
mon in traditional autism service-provision – to assume 
that all autistic traits that diverge from the norm should 
automatically be suppressed (see Pellicano & den Hout-
ing, 2022, for a discussion).
Many debates over the implications of neurodiversity 
focus on which populations it should be applied to. Par-
ticularly in the context of autism, this has often focused 
on the appropriateness of applying neurodiversity ideas 
(in particular the rejection of cure and prevention) to au-
tistic persons with severe impairments in communication 
and cognition. For example, Baron-Cohen (2019) argues 
for “taking a fine-grained look at the heterogeneity with-
in autism” with the goal of splitting the autism spectrum Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
Ne’eman/Pellicano 《人类发展》2022；66：149–157154
DOI：10.1159/000524277孤独谱系群体看起来和行为正常的父母与提供者所使用
（参见Fein等人,2013）。与自闭症行为主义方法相关，
神经多样性活动家长期以来将“康复”孤独谱系群体的愿
望视为一种虐待性干预形式的工具（孤独谱系自我倡导网
络,2013;Ne’eman,2021;Padawar,2014）。事实上，
孤独谱系活动者积极游说，反对在DSM‑5的孤独谱系定义
中包含“康复标准”（Kapp&Ne’eman,2020）。
在追求最大包容性的过程中，神经多样性运动
者可能无意中实践一种意识形态帝国主义：坚持将
特定的批判和世界观引入那些已有自身、且不相容
的意识形态承诺的社群。当然，也有许多患有精神
疾病的人士确实试图将神经多样性应用于自身状况
（Graby,2015;Hart,2020）。这种意见分歧存在
于每个社群中——如果能够解决，最好通过该社群边
界内的内部辩论和争论来实现，而非由善意的盟友
从外部强加一种意识形态。因此，我们建议在考虑
Dwyer关于神经多样性边界的讨论中所阐述的伦理
因素之外，还应考量政治因素：神经多样性运动应
寻求在那些残障社群中变得相关，这些社群内部存
在足够多的支持者，愿意将神经多样性的理念应用
于其自身状况。这种方法不要求统一的意见（这从
未存在过），甚至不需要达到孤独谱系社群背景中
所见的那种共识程度。但它应坚持在从外部要求应
用神经多样性理念之前，社群内部需具备一定的关
键性支持基础。
这也可能成为反对使用神经多样性一词进行描
述性应用的另一个论据——将其描述性地应用于一个
拒绝该术语意识形态内涵的社群，既可能引发混淆，
也可能招致合理的反对，即该术语最广泛的应用会
干涉其他残障社群的自我决定。
神经多样性的操作化：实际利害关系是什么？
无论其定义和范围如何，关于神经多样性最重要
的实践问题在于其现实意义。本期特刊收录了若干关
于这一概念的重要探讨。在记录#
TakeTheMaskOff社交媒体运动时，Radulski(2022)强调了孤独谱系群体作为少数群体，
生活在常对孤独谱系存在方式怀有敌意的世界中所
面临的巨大日常风险，社会强加给孤独谱系群体的
伪装要求，类似于种族和族裔少数群体及其他受压
迫人群所经历的状况。Zajic与Brown(2022)对神
经多样性理念在写作教学中的影响进行了有趣的探
讨，研究了神经多样性可能对写作教学以及孤独谱
系写作技能发展的研究意味着什么。Botha与
Gillespie‑Lynch(2022)探讨了孤独谱系与其他残
障社群的交集，神经多样性的理念已与其它形式的
边缘化身份认同一起应用于这些社群。在此过程中，
他们借鉴了关于边缘化交叉影响的丰富文献，以更
好地理解孤独谱系身份发展和社群建设——这些是神
经多样性运动行动主义的关键基石。
Dwyer（2022年）就神经多样性如何将其理念
操作化以用于实际服务提供目的的各种方法，提供
了有益的理论探讨。最终，他主张一种互动主义的
神经多样性方法，该方法承认挑战源自于损伤与环
境的结合。（尽管他将此与英国“强”社会残障模
型进行对比，但我们注意到，这种方法与美国社会
模型的通俗用法以及许多早期孤独谱系活动者在推
动神经多样性理念发展时对其的理解是一致的。）
在Dwyer倡导的互动主义方法中，干预措施可以针
对改变社会或改变个人特质（或两者兼而有之），
但选择依据应是什么最终能提升生活质量，而非基
于什么被认定为“导致”了根本性挑战。这种方法
有很多优点，其一个必然的推论似乎是：必须摒弃
那种在传统孤独谱系服务提供中仍非常普遍的倾向，
即认为所有偏离常态的孤独谱系特质都应自动被压
制（相关讨论参见Pellicano&denHouting，
2022年）。
许多关于神经多样性含义的争论，都聚焦于它
应适用于哪些人群。特别是在孤独谱系的语境下，
争论常常集中在将神经多样性理念（尤其是拒绝治
愈和预防）应用于那些在沟通和认知方面有重度障
碍的孤独谱系群体是否合适。例如，
Baron‑Cohen（2019）主张“对孤独谱系内部的异
质性进行细致入微的审视”，目的是将孤独谱系
--- Page 7 ---
Neurodiversity as Politics155
Human Development 2022;66:149–157
DOI: 10.1159/000524277into those components to which a neurodiversity ap-
proach should be applied and those for which the tradi-
tional medical model may be more appropriate. Similarly, 
some critics of the neurodiversity movement have recent-
ly called for the creation of a separate “profound” or “se-
vere autism” diagnostic category in which to place those 
with the most severe impairments, a position endorsed 
often out of a desire to separate such individuals from the 
service-provision changes argued for by neurodiversity 
and disability rights activists (National Council on Severe 
Autism, 2021). Others, including both autistic people and 
parents of autistic persons with severe impairments, have 
criticized such an approach, arguing that doing so creates 
an artificial division and segregates higher-support need 
autistic people from innovations and rights that they too 
should have access to (Autistic Self Advocacy Network, 
2021; Rosa, 2021).
We agree with this latter perspective. There is no sci-
entific basis for segmenting the autism spectrum in the 
way that proponents of a separate “severe” autism label 
suggest. Doing so poses grave risks, potentially segregat-
ing those subject to such a severe label from the rights and 
efforts at community integration won in the broader dis-
ability context. Nonetheless, we do believe that it is im-
portant for neurodiversity proponents to make the case 
explicitly that their ideas have relevance to those with the 
most severe impairment. Contrary to the movement’s 
critics, many, if not all, neurodiversity advocacy organi-
zations are actively concerned with severe disability, in-
vesting considerable resources into advocating for more 
resources for long-term services and supports, augmenta-
tive and alternative communication, and other needs that 
are most acute among autistic people with the most severe 
impairments (Ne’eman & Bascom, 2020). Research on 
the views of those who support neurodiversity docu-
ments that most do not object to measures designed to 
improve adaptive skills as opposed to suppressing autistic 
traits (Kapp et al., 2013).
We suggest a further contribution to help make the 
case for neurodiversity’s broad applicability, accom-
plished via a simple and long overdue paradigm shift. 
Rather than debate which populations neurodiversity 
should be applied to, we argue that neurodiversity is best 
understood as applying to individual traits – what in the 
medical context might be referred to as symptoms – rath-
er than to whole people or populations. Efforts to suppress 
hand flapping and other forms of “stimming” or to de-
mand eye contact are unacceptable regardless of how se-
verely impaired a person may be in cognition or commu-
nication. This is because they are not intrinsically harm-ful. In contrast, self-injury, violence, or lack of a 
functional communication system are appropriate tar-
gets of service-provider intervention because they repre-
sent intrinsic harms to the person who experiences them 
or others. In such instances, the harms are not the result 
of stigma but would emerge regardless of the prevailing 
social norms. Such actions can be appropriate targets of 
intervention.
Such an approach recognizes that, rather than splitting 
autistic people and other disability communities into 
groups subject to the neurodiversity model and groups 
subject to the traditional medical model, both models 
might conceivably have application in the same person. 
By taking a trait-oriented approach to operationalizing 
neurodiversity, it is possible to address intrinsically harm-
ful disability-related traits, such as self-injury, lack of 
communication, or anorexia, while also rejecting and 
fighting against the clinical passing demands embedded 
within so much of autism service-provision and research 
practice (Ne’eman, 2021). Such an approach is consistent 
with Dwyer’s interactionist approach and the vast major-
ity of high-level neurodiversity activism in practice. It 
also represents a useful approach through which to com-
bat the harms created by demands from clinicians, family 
members, and the broader society that autistic people at-
tempt to pass as non-autistic. As Botha and Gillespie-
Lynch (2022) discuss in their exploration of the applica-
bility of the minority stress model to autism and neuro-
logical disability, there is a longstanding literature 
showing the harms such passing demands cause in the 
context of other forms of marginalized identity that has 
considerable relevance.
This innovation also has the potential to open up doors 
for expanding neurodiversity’s critique of service-provi-
sion practices beyond the realm of mental disability, as 
many other disability categories experience harm from 
clinical passing demands imposed by providers. Although 
much work is needed to further articulate and operation-
alize these ideas, we have hope that in doing so neurodi-
versity activists can develop a set of conceptual and prac-
tical tools that will yield benefit across the disability com-
munity. The possibility exists that the neurodiversity 
critique – though now distinct – may eventually serve its 
purpose and be simply reabsorbed into the larger disabil-
ity rights movement it is now layered on top of. Such a 
long-term outcome for neurodiversity would set the stage 
for a common front to transform research and service-
provision in all areas of disability, not just those relating 
to the brain.Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
神经多样性作为政治议题155
《人类发展》2022;66:149–157DOI:
10.1159/000524277拆分为两部分：一部分适用于神经多样性方法，另一部
分则可能更适合传统的医学模型。同样地，神经多样性
运动的一些批评者最近呼吁创建一个独立的“重度”或
“重度孤独谱系”诊断类别，用于安置那些障碍最严重
的个体；这一立场常出于一种愿望，即让这些个体免受
神经多样性和残障权利活动者所倡导的服务供给变革的
影响（NationalCouncilonSevereAutism,2021）。
包括孤独谱系群体自身以及有重度障碍的孤独谱系人士
的家长在内的其他人则批评了这种做法，认为这样做制
造了人为的分裂，并将高支持需求的孤独谱系群体隔离
在创新和权利之外，而这些创新和权利本应是他们同样
有权享有的（孤独谱系自我倡导网络，2021；Rosa,
2021）。
我们赞同后一种观点。将孤独谱系按照主张单
独“重度”孤独谱系标签的人士所建议的方式进行
划分，是缺乏科学依据的。这样做会带来严重的风
险，可能使被贴上此类重度标签的人与在更广泛的
残障背景下赢得的权利及社区融合努力相隔离。尽
管如此，我们确实认为，神经多样性的支持者明确
阐述其理念对功能受损最严重的群体同样具有相关
性，这一点至关重要。与批评该运动的人士相反，
许多（即使不是全部）神经多样性倡导组织都积极
关注重度残障问题，投入大量资源倡导为长期服务
与支持、扩大与替代性沟通以及其他在功能受损最
严重的孤独谱系群体中最为迫切的需求争取更多资
源（Ne’eman&Bascom,2020）。关于神经多
样性支持者观点的研究表明，他们大多并不反对旨
在提高适应技能的措施，这与压制孤独谱系特质的
行为截然不同（Kapp等,2013）。
我们提出一个进一步的贡献，以帮助论证神经
多样性的广泛适用性，这通过一个简单且早该实现
的范式转变来完成。我们主张，与其争论神经多样
性应适用于哪些人群，不如将其理解为适用于个体
的特质——在医学语境中可能被称为症状——而非整
个人或人群。无论一个人在认知或沟通方面受损多
么严重，试图抑制手部拍打和其他形式的“刺激行
为”或要求眼神接触都是不可接受的。这是因为它
们本质上并非有害——相反，自伤、暴力或缺乏功能性沟通系统，则是服
务提供者干预的适当目标，因为它们代表着对经历
者本人或他人的内在伤害。在此类情况下，伤害并
非源于污名，而是无论主流社会规范如何都会出现。
这些行为可以成为干预的适当目标。
这种方法认识到，与其将孤独谱系群体和其他残障
社群划分为受神经多样性模型影响的群体和受传统医学
模型影响的群体，不如承认这两种模型都可能适用于同
一个人。通过采取以特质为导向的方法来操作化神经多
样性，就有可能解决本质上具有伤害性的、与残障相关
的特质，例如自伤、缺乏沟通或神经性厌食症，同时也
拒绝并反抗根植于大量孤独谱系服务提供和研究实践中
的临床伪装要求（Ne’eman，2021）。这种方法与
Dwyer互动主义方法以及实践中绝大多数高层次的神
经多样性行动主义是一致的。它也代表了一种有用的方
法，可以用来对抗由临床医生、家庭成员和更广泛社会
的要求所造成的伤害，这些要求迫使孤独谱系群体试图
伪装成非孤独谱系者。正如Botha和
Gillespie‑Lynch（2022）在他们探讨少数群体压力模
型对孤独谱系和神经性残障的适用性时所讨论的，已有
大量长期文献表明，这类伪装要求在其他形式的边缘化
身份背景下所造成的伤害，具有相当大的相关性。
这项创新也具备潜力，能将神经多样性对服务
提供实践的批判拓展至精神残障领域之外，因为许
多其他残障类别同样遭受着服务提供者强加的临床
伪装要求所带来的伤害。尽管需要大量工作来进一
步阐明并实践这些想法，但我们抱有希望：通过努
力，神经多样性活动家能够开发出一套概念性与实
践性的工具，为整个残障社群带来益处。存在这样
一种可能性：神经多样性的批判——尽管目前是独立
的——或许最终会完成其使命，并简单地被重新吸纳
进它所依附的、更宏大的残障权利运动中。神经多
样性的这一长远结局，将为建立一个共同阵线奠定
基础，以变革所有残障领域（而不仅仅是与大脑相
关的领域）的研究和服务提供。
--- Page 8 ---
Ne’eman/Pellicano Human Development 2022;66:149–157156
DOI: 10.1159/000524277Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Marc Stears and Amanda Vivian for 
discussion of the ideas presented in this commentary.
Statement of Ethics
No ethical approval was required for the preparation of this 
manuscript, as no human or animal subjects were used.
Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors have no conflicts of interest of which they are 
aware.Funding Sources
E.P. was supported by an Australian Research Council Future 
Fellowship (FT190100077). The views expressed are the views of 
the authors alone and do not necessarily represent the views of 
their organizations or funding sources. A.N was supported by the 
National Institute of Mental Health of the National Institutes of 
Health under Award Number T32MH019733. The content is sole-
ly the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily repre-
sent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
Author Contributions
A.N. and E.P. discussed the ideas presented herein; A.N. wrote 
the initial draft of the manuscript; E.P. reviewed and edited the 
manuscript; both authors approved the final version of the manu-
script prior to submission.
References
Asasumasu, K. (2016). PSA from the actual coiner 
of “neurodivergent”.  Tumblr.https:  //sherlocks -
flataffect.tumblr.com/post/121295972384/psa-
from-the-actual-coiner-of-neurodivergent
Asch, A., &   Barlevy, D. (2012). Disability and ge-
netics:   A disability critique of pre-natal testing 
and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). 
eLS.
Autistic Self Advocacy Network. (2013, January 
23). ASAN statement on Fein study on autism 
and “recovery”. https:  //autisticadvocacy.
org/2013/01/asan-statement-on-fein-study-
on-autism-and-recovery/#_edn1
Autistic Self Advocacy Network. (2021, Decem-
ber 9). Functioning labels harm autistic people. 
https:  //autisticadvocacy.org/2021/12/func-
tioning-labels-harm-autistic-people/
Bailin, A. (2019, June 6).Clearing up some miscon-
ceptions about neurodiversity. Scientific 
American. https:  //blogs.scientificamerican.
com/observations/clearing-up-some-mis-
conceptions-about-neurodiversity/
Baron-Cohen, S. (2019, April 30). The concept of 
neurodiversity is dividing the autism commu-
nity. Scientific American. https:  //blogs.scien-
tificamerican.com/observations/the-con-
cept-of-neurodiversity-is-dividing-the-au-
tism-community/
Bertilsdotter Rosqvist, H., Chown, N., &   Sten-
ning, A. (Eds.). (2020). Neurodiversity studies:   
A new critical paradigm. Routledge.
Botha, M., &   Gillespie-Lynch, K. (2022). Come as 
you are:   Examining autistic identity develop-
ment and the neurodiversity movement 
through an intersectional lens. Human Devel-
opment, 66(2).
Buckle K. L. (2020). Autscape. In S. Kapp (Ed.), 
Autistic community and the neurodiversity 
movement (pp. 109–22). Palgrave Macmillan.Chapman, R. (2020). Defining neurodiversity for 
research and practice. In H. Bertilsdotter 
Rosqvist, N. Chown &   A. Stenning (Eds.), 
Neurodiversity studies:   A new critical para-
digm (pp. 218–20). Routledge.
Chapman, R. (2021, August 18). Negotiating the 
neurodiversity concept:   Towards epistemic 
justice in conceptualising health. Psychology 
Today. https:  //www.psychologytoday.com/
us/blog/neurodiverse-age/202108/negotiat-
ing-the-neurodiversity-concept
Dekker, M. (1999). On our own terms:   Emerging 
autistic culture. Autism99 Online Conference. 
http:  //www.autscape.org/2015/programme/
handouts/Autistic-Culture-07-Oct-1999.pdf
den Houting, J. (2019). Neurodiversity:   An insid-
er’s perspective. Autism, 23, 271–273.
Durbin-Westby, P. C. (2012, April 1).From the 
pro-neurodiversity trenches. https:  //autisti-
cadvocacy.org/2012/04/from-the-pro-neuro-
diversity-trenches/
Dwyer, P. (2022). The neurodiversity approach(es):   
What are they and what do they mean for re -
searchers? Human Development, 66(2).
Ernst &   Young (n.d.). Neurodiversity-powered 
transformation. https:  //www.ey.com/en_us/
innovation/neurodiversity-powered-trans-
formation
Fein, D, Barton, M, Eigsti, IM, Kelley, E, Naigles, 
L, Schultz, RT, Stevens M, Helt M, Orinstein 
A, Rosenthal M, Troyb E, &   Tyson K. (2013). 
Optimal outcome in individuals with a his-
tory of autism. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 54, 195–205.
Gillespie-Lynch, K., Dwyer, P., Constantino, C., 
Kapp, S. K., Hotez, E., Riccio, A., DeNigris, D., 
Kofner, B., &   Endlich, E. (2020). Can we 
broaden the neurodiversity movement with-
out weakening it? Participatory approaches as 
a framework for cross-disability alliance 
building. In A. C. Carey, J. M. Ostrove &   T. 
Fannon (Eds.), Disability alliances and allies:   
Opportunities and challenges. Emerald.Graby, S. (2015). Neurodiversity:   Bridging the gap 
between the disabled people’s movement and 
the mental health system survivors’ move -
ment. In J. Anderson, B. Sapey &   H. Spandler 
(Eds.), Madness, distress and the politics of dis -
ablement (pp. 231–244). Policy Press.
Grandin, T., &   Scariano, M. M. (1986). Emer-
gence:   Labeled autistic. Arena Press.
Hart, A. (2020). A new alliance? The hearing voic-
es movement and neurodiversity. In H. Ber-
tilsdotter Rosqvist, N. Chown &   A. Stenning 
(Eds.), Neurodiversity studies:   A new critical 
paradigm (pp. 221–225). Routledge.
Heilker, P., &   Yergeau, M. (2011). Autism and 
rhetoric. College English, 73, 485–497.
Jiujias, M., Kelley, E., &   Hall, L. (2017). Restricted, 
repetitive behaviors in autism spectrum dis-
order and obsessive-compulsive disorder:   A 
comparative review. Child Psychiatry &   Hu-
man Development, 48, 944–959.
Kapp, S. K., Gillespie-Lynch, K., Sherman, L. E., 
&   Hutman, T. (2013). Deficit, difference, or 
both? Autism and neurodiversity. Develop-
mental Psychology, 49, 59–71.
Kapp, S. K., &   Ne’eman, A. (2020). Lobbying Au-
tism’s Diagnostic Revision in the DSM-5. In 
S. Kapp (Ed.), Autistic community and the 
neurodiversity movement (pp. 167–94). Pal-
grave Macmillan.
King, B. H. (2019). Fluoxetine and repetitive be-
haviors in children and adolescents with au-
tism spectrum disorder. Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Association, 322(16), 1557–1558.
Kras, J. F. (2010). The “ransom notes” affair:   
When the neurodiversity movement came of 
age. Disability Studies Quarterly, 30. https:  //
dsq-sds.org/article/%C2%A0view/1065/1254
Leadbitter, K., Buckle, K. L., Ellis, C., &   Dekker, 
M. (2021). Autistic self-advocacy and the neu-
rodiversity movement:   Implications for au-
tism early intervention research and practice. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 635690.Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
Ne’eman/Pellicano 《人类发展》2022；66：149–157156
DOI：10.1159/000524277致谢
作者感谢MarcStears和AmandaVivian就本文评论中所提观
点进行的讨论。
伦理声明
本文稿的撰写无需伦理批准，因其未使用任何人类或动物受试
者。
利益冲突声明
作者没有已知的利益冲突。资金来源
E.P.获得了澳大利亚研究委员会未来研究员基金（
FT190100077）的支持。本文观点仅代表作者个人，不一定
代表其所属机构或资助方的观点。A.N.获得了美国国立卫生
研究院下属国家心理健康研究所的资助，资助编号为
T32MH019733。文章内容仅由作者负责，不一定代表美国
国立卫生研究院的官方观点。
作者贡献
A.N.与E.P.讨论了本文提出的观点；A.N.撰写了稿件
初稿；E.P.审阅并编辑了稿件；两位作者均在提交前批准了
稿件的最终版本。
参考
Asasumasu, K. (2016). PSA from the actual coiner 
of “neurodivergent”. Tumblr.https:  //sherlocks-
flataffect.tumblr.com/post/121295972384/psa-
from-the-actual-coiner-of-neurodivergent
Asch, A., &   Barlevy, D. (2012). Disability and ge-
netics:   A disability critique of pre-natal testing 
and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). 
eLS.
Autistic Self Advocacy Network. (2013, January 
23). ASAN statement on Fein study on autism 
and “recovery”. https:  //autisticadvocacy.
org/2013/01/asan-statement-on-fein-study-
on-autism-and-recovery/#_edn1
Autistic Self Advocacy Network. (2021, Decem-
ber 9). Functioning labels harm autistic people. 
https:  //autisticadvocacy.org/2021/12/func-
tioning-labels-harm-autistic-people/
Bailin, A. (2019, June 6).Clearing up some miscon-
ceptions about neurodiversity. Scientific 
American. https:  //blogs.scientificamerican.
com/observations/clearing-up-some-mis-
conceptions-about-neurodiversity/
Baron-Cohen, S. (2019, April 30). The concept of 
neurodiversity is dividing the autism commu-
nity. Scientific American. https:  //blogs.scien-
tificamerican.com/observations/the-con-
cept-of-neurodiversity-is-dividing-the-au-
tism-community/
Bertilsdotter Rosqvist, H., Chown, N., &   Sten-
ning, A. (Eds.). (2020). Neurodiversity studies:   
A new critical paradigm. Routledge.
Botha, M., &   Gillespie-Lynch, K. (2022). Come as 
you are:   Examining autistic identity develop-
ment and the neurodiversity movement 
through an intersectional lens. Human Devel-
opment, 66(2).
Buckle K. L. (2020). Autscape. In S. Kapp (Ed.), 
Autistic community and the neurodiversity 
movement (pp. 109–22). Palgrave Macmillan.Chapman, R. (2020). Defining neurodiversity for 
research and practice. In H. Bertilsdotter 
Rosqvist, N. Chown &   A. Stenning (Eds.), 
Neurodiversity studies:   A new critical para-
digm (pp. 218–20). Routledge.
Chapman, R. (2021, August 18). Negotiating the 
neurodiversity concept:   Towards epistemic 
justice in conceptualising health. Psychology 
Today. https:  //www.psychologytoday.com/
us/blog/neurodiverse-age/202108/negotiat-
ing-the-neurodiversity-concept
Dekker, M. (1999). On our own terms:   Emerging 
autistic culture. Autism99 Online Conference. 
http:  //www.autscape.org/2015/programme/
handouts/Autistic-Culture-07-Oct-1999.pdf
den Houting, J. (2019). Neurodiversity:   An insid-
er’s perspective. Autism, 23, 271–273.
Durbin-Westby, P. C. (2012, April 1).From the 
pro-neurodiversity trenches. https:  //autisti-
cadvocacy.org/2012/04/from-the-pro-neuro-
diversity-trenches/
Dwyer, P. (2022). The neurodiversity approach(es):   
What are they and what do they mean for re-
searchers? Human Development, 66(2).
Ernst &   Young (n.d.). Neurodiversity-powered 
transformation. https:  //www.ey.com/en_us/
innovation/neurodiversity-powered-trans-
formation
Fein, D, Barton, M, Eigsti, IM, Kelley, E, Naigles, 
L, Schultz, RT, Stevens M, Helt M, Orinstein 
A, Rosenthal M, Troyb E, &   Tyson K. (2013). 
Optimal outcome in individuals with a his-
tory of autism. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 54, 195–205.
Gillespie-Lynch, K., Dwyer, P., Constantino, C., 
Kapp, S. K., Hotez, E., Riccio, A., DeNigris, D., 
Kofner, B., &   Endlich, E. (2020). Can we 
broaden the neurodiversity movement with-
out weakening it? Participatory approaches as 
a framework for cross-disability alliance 
building. In A. C. Carey, J. M. Ostrove &   T. 
Fannon (Eds.), Disability alliances and allies:   
Opportunities and challenges. Emerald.Graby, S. (2015). Neurodiversity:   Bridging the gap 
between the disabled people’s movement and 
the mental health system survivors’ move-
ment. In J. Anderson, B. Sapey &   H. Spandler 
(Eds.), Madness, distress and the politics of dis-
ablement (pp. 231–244). Policy Press.
Grandin, T., &   Scariano, M. M. (1986). Emer-
gence:   Labeled autistic. Arena Press.
Hart, A. (2020). A new alliance? The hearing voic-
es movement and neurodiversity. In H. Ber-
tilsdotter Rosqvist, N. Chown &   A. Stenning 
(Eds.), Neurodiversity studies:   A new critical 
paradigm (pp. 221–225). Routledge.
Heilker, P., &   Yergeau, M. (2011). Autism and 
rhetoric. College English, 73, 485–497.
Jiujias, M., Kelley, E., &   Hall, L. (2017). Restricted, 
repetitive behaviors in autism spectrum dis-
order and obsessive-compulsive disorder:   A 
comparative review. Child Psychiatry &   Hu-
man Development, 48, 944–959.
Kapp, S. K., Gillespie-Lynch, K., Sherman, L. E., 
&   Hutman, T. (2013). Deficit, difference, or 
both? Autism and neurodiversity. Develop-
mental Psychology, 49, 59–71.
Kapp, S. K., &   Ne’eman, A. (2020). Lobbying Au-
tism’s Diagnostic Revision in the DSM-5. In 
S. Kapp (Ed.), Autistic community and the 
neurodiversity movement (pp. 167–94). Pal-
grave Macmillan.
King, B. H. (2019). Fluoxetine and repetitive be-
haviors in children and adolescents with au-
tism spectrum disorder. Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Association, 322(16), 1557–1558.
Kras, J. F. (2010). The “ransom notes” affair:   
When the neurodiversity movement came of 
age. Disability Studies Quarterly, 30. https:  //
dsq-sds.org/article/%C2%A0view/1065/1254
Leadbitter, K., Buckle, K. L., Ellis, C., &   Dekker, 
M. (2021). Autistic self-advocacy and the neu-
rodiversity movement:   Implications for au-
tism early intervention research and practice. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 635690.
--- Page 9 ---
Neurodiversity as Politics157
Human Development 2022;66:149–157
DOI: 10.1159/000524277Microsoft (n.d.). Microsoft neurodiversity hiring 
program &   FAQ. https:  //www.microsoft.
com/en-us/diversity/inside-microsoft/cross-
disability/neurodiversityhiring
Morrison, L. J. (2013). Talking back to psychiatry:   
The psychiatric consumer/survivor/ex-patient 
movement. Routledge.
National Council on Severe Autism (2021). Calls 
for categorical recognition of severe autism in 
the DSM. https:  //www.ncsautism.org/blog//
dsmrevision
Ne’eman, A. (2021). When disability is defined by 
behavior, outcome measures should not pro-
mote ‘passing’. AMA Journal of Ethics, 23, 
E569–E575.
Ne’eman, A., Albrecht, K., &   Kapp, S. K. (2020). 
Obsessive-compulsive behaviors in autism. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 
323, 790.
Ne’eman, A., &   Bascom, J. (2020). Autistic self-
advocacy in the developmental disability 
movement. The American Journal of Bioeth-
ics, 20, 25–27.
Padawar, R. (2014). The kids who beat autism. The 
New York Times. https:  //www.nytimes.
com/2014/08/03/magazine/the-kids-who-
beat-autism.htmlPellicano, E., &   den Houting, J. (2022). Annual 
research review:   Shifting from “normal sci-
ence” to neurodiversity in autism science. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
63(4), 381–396.
Pripas-Kapit, S. (2020). Historicizing Jim Sin-
clair’s “don’t mourn for us”:   A cultural and 
intellectual history of neurodiversity’s first 
manifesto. In S. K. Kapp (Ed.), Autistic com-
munity and the neurodiversity movement:   Sto-
ries from the frontline (pp. 23–39). Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Radulski, B. M. (2022). Conceptualising autistic 
masking, camouflaging, and neurotypical 
privilege:   Towards a minority group model of 
neurodiversity. Human Development, 66(2).
Robertson, S. M. (2010). Neurodiversity, quality 
of life, and autistic adults:   Shifting research 
and professional focuses onto real-life chal-
lenges. Disability Studies Quarterly, 30. http:  //
dsq-sds.org/article/view/1069/1234
Rosa, S. (2021, December 8). Creating a ‘profound 
autism’ category is segregation, not progress. 
Thinking person’s guide to autism. http:  //
www.thinkingautismguide.com/2021/12/
creating-profound-autism-category-is.html
Rottier, H., &   Gernsbacher, M. A. (2020). Autistic 
adult and non-autistic parent advocates:   
Bridging the divide. In A. Carey, J. Ostrove &   
T. Fannon (Eds.), Disability alliances and al-
lies (pp. 155–66). Emerald.Sinclair, J. (1993). Don’t mourn for us.http:  //
www.autreat.com/dont_mourn.html
Sinclair, J. (2005, January). Autism network inter-
national:   The development of a community 
and its culture. http:  //www.autreat.com/His-
tory_of_ANI.html
Sinclair, J. (2010). Cultural commentary:   Being 
autistic together. Disability Studies Quarterly. 
30. https:  //dsq-sds.org/article/view/1075/1248
Solvang, P. K., &   Haualand, H. (2014). Accessibil-
ity and diversity:   Deaf space in action. Scan-
dinavian Journal of Disability Research, 16(1), 
1–13.
Thomas, T. (2021, April 2). Pilot increases neuro-
diversity in government. Performance.gov.
https:  //www.performance.gov/blog/mitre-
neurodiversity-pilot/
Walker, N. (2014). Neurodiversity:   Some basic 
terms &   definitions. https:  //neuroqueer.com/
neurodiversity-terms-and-definitions/
Zajic, M. C., &   Brown, H. M. (2022). Measuring 
autistic writing skills:   Combining perspec-
tives from neurodiversity advocates, autism 
researchers, and writing theories. Human De-
velopment, 66(2).Downloaded from http://karger.com/hde/article-pdf/66/2/149/3750903/000524277.pdf by guest on 08 January 2026
神经多样性作为政治议题157
《人类发展》2022;66:149–157DOI:
10.1159/000524277Microsoft (n.d.). Microsoft neurodiversity hiring 
program &   FAQ. https:  //www.microsoft.
com/en-us/diversity/inside-microsoft/cross-
disability/neurodiversityhiring
Morrison, L. J. (2013). Talking back to psychiatry:   
The psychiatric consumer/survivor/ex-patient 
movement. Routledge.
National Council on Severe Autism (2021). Calls 
for categorical recognition of severe autism in 
the DSM. https:  //www.ncsautism.org/blog//
dsmrevision
Ne’eman, A. (2021). When disability is defined by 
behavior, outcome measures should not pro-
mote ‘passing’. AMA Journal of Ethics, 23, 
E569–E575.
Ne’eman, A., Albrecht, K., &   Kapp, S. K. (2020). 
Obsessive-compulsive behaviors in autism. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 
323, 790.
Ne’eman, A., &   Bascom, J. (2020). Autistic self-
advocacy in the developmental disability 
movement. The American Journal of Bioeth-
ics, 20, 25–27.
Padawar, R. (2014). The kids who beat autism. The 
New York Times. https:  //www.nytimes.
com/2014/08/03/magazine/the-kids-who-
beat-autism.htmlPellicano, E., &   den Houting, J. (2022). Annual 
research review:   Shifting from “normal sci-
ence” to neurodiversity in autism science. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
63(4), 381–396.
Pripas-Kapit, S. (2020). Historicizing Jim Sin-
clair’s “don’t mourn for us”:   A cultural and 
intellectual history of neurodiversity’s first 
manifesto. In S. K. Kapp (Ed.), Autistic com-
munity and the neurodiversity movement:   Sto-
ries from the frontline (pp. 23–39). Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Radulski, B. M. (2022). Conceptualising autistic 
masking, camouflaging, and neurotypical 
privilege:   Towards a minority group model of 
neurodiversity. Human Development, 66(2).
Robertson, S. M. (2010). Neurodiversity, quality 
of life, and autistic adults:   Shifting research 
and professional focuses onto real-life chal-
lenges. Disability Studies Quarterly, 30. http:  //
dsq-sds.org/article/view/1069/1234
Rosa, S. (2021, December 8). Creating a ‘profound 
autism’ category is segregation, not progress. 
Thinking person’s guide to autism. http:  //
www.thinkingautismguide.com/2021/12/
creating-profound-autism-category-is.html
Rottier, H., &   Gernsbacher, M. A. (2020). Autistic 
adult and non-autistic parent advocates:   
Bridging the divide. In A. Carey, J. Ostrove &   
T. Fannon (Eds.), Disability alliances and al-
lies (pp. 155–66). Emerald.Sinclair, J. (1993). Don’t mourn for us.http:  //
www.autreat.com/dont_mourn.html
Sinclair, J. (2005, January). Autism network inter-
national:   The development of a community 
and its culture. http:  //www.autreat.com/His-
tory_of_ANI.html
Sinclair, J. (2010). Cultural commentary:   Being 
autistic together. Disability Studies Quarterly. 
30. https:  //dsq-sds.org/article/view/1075/1248
Solvang, P. K., &   Haualand, H. (2014). Accessibil-
ity and diversity:   Deaf space in action. Scan-
dinavian Journal of Disability Research, 16(1), 
1–13.
Thomas, T. (2021, April 2). Pilot increases neuro-
diversity in government. Performance.gov.
https:  //www.performance.gov/blog/mitre-
neurodiversity-pilot/
Walker, N. (2014). Neurodiversity:   Some basic 
terms &   definitions. https:  //neuroqueer.com/
neurodiversity-terms-and-definitions/
Zajic, M. C., &   Brown, H. M. (2022). Measuring 
autistic writing skills:   Combining perspec-
tives from neurodiversity advocates, autism 
researchers, and writing theories. Human De-
velopment, 66(2).