 
 À DSM-IV-TR À DSM-IV  À DSM-V À DSM-V  À DSM-V-TR À DSM-V-TR  À ICD-10  À ICD-11 
XyZ  ASD 

Mental Retardation

41 I

separation from home or from those to wlhom the child is attached. Selective Mutism is characterized by a consistent failurespeak in specific social situations despite speaking in other situations. Reactive A1chment Disorder of Infancy or Early Child hood is characterized by markedly dis1turbed and developmentally inappropriate social relatedness that occurs in most contexts and is associated with grossly patho genie care. Stereotypic Movement Disorder is characterized by repetitive, seemingly driven, and nonfunctional motor behavior that markedly interferes with normal ac tivities and at times may result in bodily injury. Disorder of Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence Not Otherwise Specified is a residual category for coding disorders with onset in infancy, childhood, or adolEcence that do not meet criteria for any spe cific disorder in the Classification.
Children or adolescents may present with problems requiring clinical attention that are not defined as mental disorders (e.g., Relational Problems, Problems Related to Abuse or Neglect, Bereavement, Borderline Intellectual Functioning, Academic Problem, Child or Adolescent Antisocial !Behavior, Identity Problem). These are listed at the end of the manual in the section''' Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention" (see p. 731).
DSM-ill-R included two anxiety diso,rders specific to children and adolescents, Overanxious Disorder of Childhood and Avoidant Disorder of Childhood, that have been subsumed under Generalizediety Disorder and SocialPhobia, respectively, because of similarities in essential features.



307.9 Communication Disorder Not Otherwise Specified

691

307.9 Commu1nication Disorder Not Other\l\jrise Specified
This category is for disorders in communication that do not meet criteria for any specific Communication Disorder; for examjple, a voice disorder (i.e., an abnormality of vocal pitch, loudness, quality, tone, or re:Sonance).
Pervasive Develo,pment al Disorders

I 70

Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence

299.00 Autis:tic Disorder
D iagnostic Features
The essential features of Autistic Disorder are the presence of markedly abnormal or impaired development in social interaction and communication and a markedly restricted repertoire of activity and interests. Manifestations of the disorder vary greatly depending on the developmental level ,md chronological age of the individual. Autistic Disorder is sometimes referred to as early infantile autism, childhood autism, or Kanner's autism.
The impairment in reciprocal social interaction is gross and sustained. There may be marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors (e.g., eyeto-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures and gestures) to regulate social interaction and communication (Criterion Ala). There may be failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to developmental level (Criterion Alb) that may take different forms at different ages. Younger individuals may have little or no interest in establishing friendships. Older individuals may have alll interest in friendship but lack understanding of the conventions of social interaction. There may be a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests, or a,:hievements with other people (e.g., not showing, bringing, or pointing out objects they find interesting) (Criterion Ale). Lack of social or emotional reciprocity may be present (e.g., not actively participating in simple social play or games, preferring solitary activities, or involving others in activities only as tools or "mechanical" aids) (Criterion Ald). Often an individual's awareness of others is markedly impaired. Individuals with this disorder may be oblivious to other children (including siblings), may have no concept of the needs of others, or may not notice another person's distress.
The impairment in communication is als,o marked and sustained and affects both verbal and nonverbal skills. There may be dlelay in, or total lack of, the development of spoken language (Criterion A2a). In individuals who do speak, there may be marked impairment in the ability to initiate or sustain a conversation with others (Criterion A2b), or a stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic lan guage (Criterion A2c). There may also be a lack of varied, spontaneous make-believe play or social imitative play appropriate Ito developmental level (Criterion A2d). When speech does develop, the pitch, intonation, rate, rhythm, or stress may be abnormal (e.g., tone of voice may be monotoinous or inappropriate to context or may contain questionlike rises at ends of statements). Grammatical structures are often immature and include stereotyped and rep1titive use of language (e.g., repetition of words or phrases regardless of meaning; repeating jingles or commercials) or idiosyncratic language (i.e., language that has meaning only to those familiar with the individual's communication style). Language comprehension is often very delayed,

DSM V
iCk elee Cetothe"I gnOS ICClielia
meliC PS C iat SSOCi 110

 
Disorders Csuall;v First Diagnosed in InfancÀ. Childho,od, 01À Adolescence
             
57

 65
 Pervasive Developmental Disorders
299.00Autistic Disorder A  (1)  (2) (3) 
(1) À  (2)(3) (1)
 (a)
  (b)  (c)     (d)  (reciprocity) (2)   (a) 

66

(b

(c idiosyncratliacnguag)e
(d

(3

(a

(b
(c (mannerism )

ritual)s

(d B

(l

2

À3

C

Rett

299.80 Rett
A (l (2

DSM5ASD

67

(3 B
(D
(2

5 48 5 30

(3
(4 (5

29.910
DSM5ASD
Chiidh00d DISintegratjVDeisorder A

B :
(l
(2 (3 (4 (5 C

68
(1 (2

(3 D

. 299.80 Asperger
A
(l

(2 (3

(4

I

BÀ

(l

(2

reciprocit)y

(3 nerism)
(4 CÀ
DÀ
EÀ

ritual)s

69
man -

FÀ
29 80 PervasiveDevelopmental DjsorderNot other-
w osespecjfo(IendcludiAntgypicAaultis)m

(atypicalutis)mJ

70 
 

DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF
MENTAL DISORDERS
FIFTH EDITION
DSM-5TM

Neurodevelopmen tal Disorders
T h e n e u ro d eve l o p m e ntal disorders are a group of conditions with onset in the
developmental period. The disorders typically manifest early in development, often be fore the child enters grade school, and are characterized by developmental deficits that produce impairments of personal, social, academic, or occupational functioning. The range of developmental deficits varies from very specific limitations of learning or control of executive functions to global impairments of social skills or intelligence. The neurode velopmental disorders frequently co-occur; for example, individuals with autism spec trum disorder often have intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), and many children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) also have a specific learning disorder. For some disorders, the clinical presentation includes symptoms of ex cess as well as deficits and delays in achieving expected milestones. For example, autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed only when the characteristic deficits of social communi cation are accompanied by excessively repetitive behaviors, restricted interests, and insis tence on sameness.
Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) is characterized by deficits in general mental abilities, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience. The deficits result in impair ments of adaptive functioning, such that the individual fails to meet standards of personal independence and social responsibility in one or more aspects of daily life, including com munication, social participation, academic or occupational functioning, and personal inde pendence at home or in community settings. Global developmental delay, as its name implies, is diagnosed when an individual fails to meet expected developmental milestones in several areas of intellectual functioning. The diagnosis is used for individuals who are unable to undergo systematic assessments of intellectual functioning, including children who are too young to participate in standardized testing. Intellectual disability may result from an acquired insult during the developmental period from, for example, a severe head injury, in which case a neurocognitive disorder also may be diagnosed.
The communication disorders include language disorder, speech sound disorder, so cial (pragmatic) communication disorder, and childhood-onset fluency disorder (stutter ing). The first three disorders are characterized by deficits in the development and use of language, speech, and social communication, respectively. Childhood-onset fluency dis order is characterized by disturbances of the normal fluency and motor production of speech, including repetitive sounds or syllables, prolongation of consonants or vowel sounds, broken words, blocking, or words produced with an excess of physical tension. Like other neurodevelopmental disorders, communication disorders begin early in life and may produce lifelong functional impairments.
Autism spectrum disorder is characterized by persistent deficits in social communica tion and social interaction across multiple contexts, including deficits in social reciprocity, nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction, and skills in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships. In addition to the social communication deficits, the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder requires the presence of restricted, re petitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Because symptoms change with de velopment and may be masked by compensatory mechanisms, the diagnostic criteria may
31

32

Neurodevelopmental Disorders

be met based on historical information, although the current presentation must cause sig nificant impairment.
Within the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, individual clinical characteristics are noted through the use of specifiers (with or without accompanying intellectual impair ment; with or without accompanying structural language impairment; associated with a known medical/genetic or environmental/acquired condition; associated with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorder), as well as specifiers that describe the autistic symptoms (age at first concern; with or without loss of established skills; sever ity). These specifiers provide clinicians with an opportunity to individualize the diagnosis and communicate a richer clinical description of the affected individuals. For example, many individuals previously diagnosed with Asperger's disorder would now receive a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder without language or intellectual impairment.
ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder defined by impairing levels of inattention, dis organization, and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity. Inattention and disorganization entail inabil ity to stay on task, seeming not to listen, and losing materials, at levels that are inconsistent with age or developmental level. Hyperactivity-impulsivity entails overactivity, fidgeting, in ability to stay seated, intruding into other people's activities, and inability to wait-symptoms that are excessive for age or developmental level. In childhood, ADHD frequently overlaps with disorders that are often considered to be "externalizing disorders," such as oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder. ADHD often persists into adulthood, with resultant impairments of social, academic and occupational functioning.
The neurodevelopmental motor disorders include developmental coordination disor der, stereotypic movement disorder, and tic disorders. Developmental coordination dis order is characterized by deficits in the acquisition and execution of coordinated motor skills and is manifested by clumsiness and slowness or inaccuracy of performance of mo tor skills that cause interference with activities of daily living. Stereotypic movement dis order is diagnosed when an individual has repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently purposeless motor behaviors, such as hand flapping, body rocking, head banging, self biting, or hitting. The movements interfere with social, academic, or other activities. If the behaviors cause self-injury, this should be specified as part of the diagnostic description. Tic disorders are characterized by the presence of motor or vocal tics, which are sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, sterotyped motor movements or vocalizations. The dura tion, presumed etiology, and clinical presentation define the specific tic disorder that is di agnosed: Tourette's disorder, persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, other specified tic disorder, and unspecified tic disorder. Tourette's disorder is diagnosed when the individual has multiple motor and vocal tics that have been present for at least 1 year and that have a waxing-waning symptom course.
Specific learning disorder, as the name implies, is diagnosed when there are specific defi cits in an individual's ability to perceive or process information efficiently and accurately. This neurodevelopmental disorder first manifests during the years of formal schooling and is characterized by persistent and impairing difficulties with learning foundational academic skills in reading, writing, and/or math. The individual's performance of the affected academic skills is well below average for age, or acceptable performance levels are achieved only with extraordinary effort. Specific learning disorder may occur in individuals identified as intellec tually gifted and manifest only when the learning demands or assessment procedures (e.g., timed tests) pose barriers that canon t be overcome by their innate intelligence and compensa tory strategies. For all individuals, specific learning disorder can produce lifelong impairments in activities dependent on the skills, including occupational performance.
The use of specifiers for the neurodevelopmental disorder diagnoses enriches the clin ical description of the individual's clinical course and current symptomatology. In addi tion to specifiers that describe the clinical presentation, such as age at onset or severity ratings, the neurodevelopmental disorders may include the specifier "associated with a known medical or genetic condition or environmental factor. " This specifier gives clini-

I ntellectual Disability ( I ntellectual Developmental Disorder)

33

cians an opportunity to document factors that may have played a role in the etiology of the disorder, as wll as those that might affect the clinical course. Examples include genetic disorders, such as fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and Rett syndrome; medical con ditions such as epilepsy; and environmental factors, including very low birth weight and fetal alcohol exposure (even in the absence of stigmata of fetal alcohol syndrome) .

50

Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism Spectru m Disorder

Diag nostic Criteria

299.00 (F84.0)

A. Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple con texts, as manifested by the following, cu rrently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text) :
1 . Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from abnormal social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation ; to reduced sharing of interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to social interactions.
2. Deficits in nonverbal comm unicative behaviors used for social interaction , ranging, for example, from poorly i ntegrated verbal and nonverbal communication ; to abnor malities in eye contact and body language or deficits in understanding and use of gestu res; to a total lack of facial expressions and nonverbal communication.
3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships, ranging, for ex ample, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts; to difficulties in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of interest in peers.
Specify current severity: Severity is based on social communication impairments and restricted, re petitive patterns of behavior (seeTable 2) .
B. Restricted , repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as manifested by at least two of the following, cu rrently or by history (examples are illustrative , not exhaus tive; see text) :
1 . Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e. g . , simple motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia, idiosyncratic phrases) .
2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e. g . , extreme distress at small changes, difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals, need to take same route or eat same food every day).
3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e. g . , strong attachment t o or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively circum scribed or perseverative interests) .
4. Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory aspects of the envi ronment (e.g . , apparent indifference to pain/temperature, adverse re sponse to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, visual fascination with lights or movement) .
Specify current severity: Severity is based on social communication impairments and restricted, re petitive patterns of behavior (see Table 2).
C. Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be masked by learned strategies in later life).
D. Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational , or other im portant areas of cu rrent functioning.

Autism Spectrum Disorder

51

E. These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual disability (intellectual devel opmental disorder) or global developmental delay. I ntellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder frequently co-occur; to make comorbid diagnoses of autism spec trum disorder and intellectual disability, social communication should be below that ex pected for general developmental level.
Note: Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder, Asperger's disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified should be given the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have marked deficits in social communication , but whose symptoms do not otherwise meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder, should be evaluated for social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Specify if: With or without accompanying intel lectual Impairment
With or without accompanying language impairment
Associated with a known medicai or genetic condition or environmental factor (Coding note: Use additional code to identify the associated medical or genetic condition.) Associated with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorder (Coding note: Use additional code[s] to identify the associated neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorder[s] .) With catatonia ( refer t o t h e criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis order, pp. 1 1 9-1 20, for definition) (Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 [F06. 1 ] catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of the co morbid catatonia.)

Recording Procedures
For autism spectrum disorder that is associated with a known medical or genetic condition or environmental factor, or with another neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral dis order, record autism spectrum disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., autism spectrum disorder associated with Rett syndrome). Severity should be recorded as level of support needed for each of the two psychopathological domains in Table 2 (e.g., "requiring very substantial support for deficits in social communication and requiring substantial support for restricted, repetitive behaviors"). Specification of "with accompanying intellectual impairment" or "without accompanying intellectual impair ment" should be recorded next. Language impairment specification should be recorded thereafter. If there is accompanying language impairment, the current level of verbal func tioning should be recorded (e.g., "with accompanying language impairment-no intelligi ble speech" or "with accompanying language impairment-phrase speech"). If catatonia is present, record separately "catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder."
Specifiers
The severity specifiers (see Table 2) may be used to describe succinctly the current symp tomatology (which might fall below Ievel l), with the recognition that severity may vary by context and fluctuate over time. Severity of social communication difficulties and re stricted, repetitive behaviors should be separately rated. The descriptive severity categories should not be used to determine eligibility for and provision of services; these can only be developed at an individual level and through discussion of personal priorities and targets.
Regarding the specifier "with or without accompanying intellectual impairment," un derstanding the (often uneven) intellectual profile of a child or adult with autism spectrum disorder is necessary for interpreting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential strengths in individuals with limited language).

Cll

TABLE 2 Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder

1\J

Severity level

Social communication

Restricted, repetitive behaviors

Level 3 "Requiring very substantial support"

Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social com munication skills cause severe impairments in func tioning, very limited initiation of social interactions, and minimal response to social over tures from others. For example, a person with few words of intelligible speech who rarely initiates interaction and, when he or she does, makes unusual approaches to meet needs only and responds to only very direct social approaches.

Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty coping with change, or other restricted / repetitive behav iors markedly interfere with functioning in all spheres. Great distress/difficulty changing focus or action.

Level 2 "Requiring substantial support"
Level l "Requiring support"

Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social com Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping with

munication skills; social impairments apparent

change, or other restricted / repetitive behaviors

even with supports in place; limited initiation of

appear frequently enough to be obvious to the

social interactions; and reduced or abnormal

casual observer and interfere with functioning

responses to social overtures from others. For

in a variety of contexts. Distress and / or difficulty

example, a person who speaks simple sentences,

changing focus or action.

whose interaction is limited to narrow special inter

ests, and who has markedly odd nonverbal com

munication.

z

CD

Without supports in place, deficits in social communi Inflexibility of behavior causes significant interfer

cation cause noticeable impairments.

ence with functioning in one or more contexts. Dif

c:
a
0.

Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear

ficulty switching between activities. Problems of

CD
a5

examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses to

organization and planning hamper independence.

0

social overtures of others. May appear to have

"0
3

decreased interest in social interactions. For example,

CD ::J

a person who is able to speak in full sentences and

PI

engages in communication but whose to-and-fro con

0

versation with others fails, and whose attempts to

Cii"
0

make friends are odd and typically unsuccessful.

a.
CD

Cil

Autism Spectrum Disorder

53

To use the specifier "with or without accompanying language impairment," the cur

rdeenstclreipvteiloonfsvfeorrb' "awl fiuthncatcicoonminpgasnhyoinugldlabnegaussaegseseimd panaidrmdeesnctr"ibmeidg.hEtxianmclpuldees

of the specific no intelligible

speech (nonverbal), single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals

"without accompanying language impairment" might be further described by speaks in

full sentences or has fluent speech. Since receptive language may lag behind expressive

language development in autism spectrum disorder, receptive and expressive language

skills should be considered separately.

The specifier "associated with a known medical or genetic condition or environmental fac

tor" should be used when the individual has a known genetic disorder (e.g., Rett syndrome,

Fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a medical disorder (e.g. epilepsy), or a history of envi

ronmental exposure (e.g., valproate, fetal alcohol syndrome, very low birth weight).

Additional neurodevelopmental, mental or behavioral conditions should also be noted

(e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; developmental coordination disorder; dis

ruptive behavior, impulse-control, or conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or bipolar

disorders; tics or Tourette's disorder; self-injury; feeding, elimination, or sleep disorders).

Diagnostic Features
The essential features of autism spectrum disorder are persistent impairment in reciprocal
social communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive pat terns of behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from early childhood and limit or impair everyday functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at which functional impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of the individual and his or her environment. Core diagnostic features are evident in the developmental period, but intervention, compensation, and current supports may mask difficulties in at least some contexts. Manifestations of the disorder also vary greatly de pending on the severity of the autistic condition, developmental level, and chronological age; hence, the term spectrum. Autism spectrum disorder encompasses disorders previously re ferred to as early infantile autism, childhood autism, Kanner's autism, high-functioning autism, atypical autism, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, child hood disintegrative disorder, and Asperger's disorder.
The impairments in communication and social interaction specified in Criterion A are pervasive and sustained. Diagnoses are most valid and reliable when based on multiple sources of information, including clinician's observations, caregiver history, and, when possible, self-report. Verbal and nonverbal deficits in social communication have varying manifestations, depending on the individual's age, intellectual level, and language ability, as well as other factors such as treatment history and current support. Many individuals have language deficits, ranging from complete lack of speech through language delays, poor comprehension of speech, echoed speech, or stilted and overly literal language. Even when formal language skills (e.g., vocabulary, grammar) are intact, the use of language for reciprocal social communication is impaired in autism spectrum disorder.
Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity (i.e., the ability to engage with others and share thoughts and feelings) are clearly evident in young children with the disorder, who may show little or no initiation of social interaction and no sharing of emotions, along with re duced or absent imitation of others' behavior. What language exists is often one-sided, lacking in social reciprocity, and used to request or label rather than to comment, share feelings, or converse. In adults without intellectual disabilities or language delays, deficits in social-emotional reciprocity may be most apparent in difficulties processing and re sponding to complex social cues (e.g., when and how to join a conversation, what not to say) . Adults who have developed compensation strategies for some social challenges still struggle in novel or unsupported situations and suffer from the effort and anxiety of con sciously calculating what is socially intuitive for most individuals.

54

Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction are mani fested by absent, reduced, or atypical use of eye contact (relative to cultural norms), ges tures, facial expressions, body orientation, or speech intonation. An early feature of autism spectrum disorder is impaired joint attention as manifested by a lack of pointing, showing, or bringing objects to share interest with others, or failure to follow someone' s pointing or eye gaze. Individuals may learn a few functional gestures, but their repertoire is smaller than that of others, and they often fail to use expressive gestures spontaneously in com munication. Among adults with fluent language, the difficulty in coordinating nonverbal communication with speech may give the impression of odd, wooden, or exaggerated "body language" during interactions. Impairment may be relatively subtle within indi vidual modes (e.g., someone may have relatively good eye contact when speaking) but noticeable in poor integration of eye contact, gesture, body posture, prosody, and facial ex pression for social communication.
Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships should be judged against norms for age, gender, and culture. There may be absent, reduced, or atyp ical social interest, manifested by rejection of others, passivity, or inappropriate ap proaches that seem aggressive or disruptive. These difficulties are particularly evident in young children, in whom there is often a lack of shared social play and imagination (e.g., age-appropriate flexible pretend play) and, later, insistence on playing by very fixed rules. Older individuals may struggle to understand what behavior is considered appropriate in one situation but not another (e.g., casual behavior during a job interview), or the different ways that language may be used to communicate (e.g., irony, white lies). There may be an apparent preference for solitary activities or for interacting with much younger or older people. Frequently, there is a desire to establish friendships without a complete or realistic idea of what friendship entails (e.g., one-sided friendships or friendships based solely on shared special interests). Relationships with siblings, co-workers, and caregivers are also important to consider (in terms of reciprocity) .
Autism spectrum disorder is also defined by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities (as specified in Criterion B), which show a range of manifestations according to age and ability, intervention, and current supports. Stereotyped or repetitive behaviors include simple motor stereotypies (e.g., hand flapping, finger flicking), repeti tive use of objects (e.g., spinning coins, lining up toys), and repetitive speech (e.g., echola lia, the delayed or immediate parroting of heard words; use of "you" when referring to self; stereotyped use of words, phrases, or prosodic patterns). Excessive adherence to rou tines and restricted patterns of behavior may be manifest in resistance to change (e.g., dis tress at apparently small changes, such as in packaging of a favorite food; insistence on adherence to rules; rigidity of thinking) or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal be havior (e.g., repetitive questioning, pacing a perimeter). Highly restricted, fixated interests in autism spectrum disorder tend to be abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., a toddler strongly attached to a pan; a child preoccupied with vacuum cleaners; an adult spending hours writing out timetables). Some fascinations and routines may relate to apparent hy per- or hyporeactivity to sensory input, manifested through extreme responses to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, fascination with lights or spinnig objects, and sometimes apparent indifference to pain, heat, or cold. Extreme re action to or rituals involving taste, smell, texture, or appearance of food or excessive food restrictions are common and may be a presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder.
Many adults with autism spectrum disorder without intellectual or language disabili ties learn to suppress repetitive behavior in public. Special interests may be a source of pleasure and motivation and provide avenues for education and employment later in life. Diagnostic criteria may be met when restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities were clearly present during childhood or at some time in the past, even if symptoms are no longer present.

Autism Spectrum Disorder

55

Criterion D requires that the features must cause clinically significant impairment in so cial, occupation!, or other important areas of current functioning. Criterion E specifies that the social communication deficits, although sometimes accompanied by intellectual disabil ity (intellectual developmental disorder), are not in line with the individual's developmental level; impairments exceed difficulties expected on the basis of developmental level.
Standardized behavioral diagnostic instruments with good psychometric properties, including caregiver interviews, questionnaires and clinician observation measures, are available and can improve reliability of diagnosis over time and across clinicians.
Associated Features Supporting D iagnosis
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder also have intellectual impairment and/or language impairment (e.g., slow to talk, language comprehension behind production). Even those with average or high intelligence have an uneven profile of abilities. The gap between intellectual and adaptive functional skills is often large. Motor deficits are often present, in cluding odd gait, clumsiness, and other abnormal motor signs (e.g., walking on tiptoes). Self injury (e.g., head banging, biting the wrist) may occur, and disruptive/challenging behav iors are more common in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder than other disorders, including intellectual disability. Adolescents and adults with autism spec trum disorder are prone to anxiety and depression. Some individuals develop catatonic-like motor behavior (slowing and "freezing" mid-action), but these are typically not of the mag nitude of a catatonic episode. However, it is possible for individuals with autism spectrum disorder to experience a marked deterioration in motor symptoms and display a full cata tonic episode with symptoms such as mutism, posturing, grimacing and waxy flexibility. The risk period for comorbid catatonia appears to be greatest in the adolescent years.
P reva l e n ce
In recent years, reported frequencies for autism spectrum disorder across U.S. and non U.S. countries have approached 1% of the population, with similar estimates in child and adult samples. It remains unclear whether higher rates reflect an expansion of the diag nostic criteria of DSM-IV to include subthreshold cases, increased awareness, differences in study methodology, or a true increase in the frequency of autism spectrum disorder.
Development and Course
The age and pattern of onset also should be noted for autism spectrum disorder. Symptoms are typically recognized during the second year of life (12-24 months of age) but may be seen earlier than 12 months if developmental delays are severe, or noted later than 24 months if symptoms are more subtle. The pattern of onset description might include information about early developmental delays or any losses of social or language skills. In cases where skills have been lost, parents or caregivers may give a history of a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or language skills. Typically, this would occur be tween 12 and 24 months of age and is distinguished from the rare instances of developmen tal regression occurring after at least 2 years of normal development (previously described as childhood disintegrative disorder).
The behavioral features of autism spectrum disorder first become evident in early childhood, with some cases presenting a lack of interest in social interaction in the first year of life. Some children with autism spectrum disorder experience developmental pla teaus or regression, with a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or use of language, often during the first 2 years of life. Such losses are rare in other disor ders and may be a useful "red flag" for autism spectrum disorder. Much more unusual and warranting more extensive medical investigation are losses of skills beyond social communication (e.g., loss of self-care, toileting, motor skills) or those occurring after the

56

Neurodevelopmental Disorders

second birthday (see also Rett syndrome in the section "Differential Diagnosis" for this disorder).
First symptoms of autism spectrum disorder frequently involve delayed language de velopment, often accompanied by lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g., pulling individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g., carrying toys around but never playing with them), and unusual communication patterns (e.g., knowing the alphabet but not responding to own name). Deafness may be suspected but is typically ruled out. During the second year, odd and repetitive behaviors and the absence of typical play become more apparent. Since many typically developing young children have strong preferences and enjoy repetition (e.g., eating the same foods, watching the same video multiple times), distinguishing restricted and repetitive behav iors that are diagnostic of autism spectrum disorder can be difficult in preschoolers. The clinical distinction is based on the type, frequency, and intensity of the behavior (e.g., a child who daily lines up objects for hours and is very distressed if any item is moved) .
Autism spectrum disorder is not a degenerative disorder, and it is typical for learning and compensation to continue throughout life. Symptoms are often most marked in early childhood and early school years, with developmental gains typical in later childhood in at least some areas (e.g., increased interest in social interaction). A small proportion of in dividuals deteriorate behaviorally during adolescence, whereas most others improve. Only a minority of individuals with autism spectrum disorder live and work indepen dently in adulthood; those who do tend to have superior language and intellectual abilities and are able to find a niche that matches their special interests and skills. In general, indi viduals with lower levels of impairment may be better able to function independently. However, even these individuals may remain socially naive and vulnerable, have difficul ties organizing practical demands without aid, and are prone to anxiety and depression. Many adults report using compensation strategies and coping mechanisms to mask their difficulties in public but suffer from the stress and effort of maintaining a socially accept able facade. Scarcely anything is known about old age in autism spectrum disorder.
Some individuals come for first diagnosis in adulthood, perhaps prompted by the diagno sis of autism in a child in the family or a breakdown of relations at work or home. Obtaining de tailed developmental history in such cases may be difficult, and it is important to consider self reported difficulties. Where clinical observation suggests criteria are currently met, autism spectrum disorder may be diagnosed, provided there is no evidence of good social and com munication skilsl in childhood. For example, the report (by parents or another relative) that the individual had ordinary and sustained reciprocal friendships and good nonverbal communi cation skills throughout childhood would rule out a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder; however, the absence of developmental information in itself should not do so.
Manifestations of the social and communication impairments and restricted / repeti tive behaviors that define autism spectrum disorder are clear in the developmental period . In later life, intervention or compensation, as well as current supports, may mask these dif ficulties in at least some contexts. However, symptoms remain sufficient to cause current impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The best established prognostic factors for individual outcome within autism spectrum disorder are presence or absence of associated intellectual disability and language impair ment (e.g., functional language by age 5 years is a good prognostic sign) and additional mental health problems. Epilepsy, as a comorbid diagnosis, is associated with greater in tellectual disability and lower verbal ability.
Environmental. A variety of nonspecific risk factors, such as advanced parental age, low birth weight, or fetal exposure to valproate, may contribute to risk of autism spectrum dis order.

Autism Spectrum Disorder

57

Genetic and physiological. Heritability estimates for autism spectrum disorder have ranged from 37░/ to higher than 90%, based on twin concordance rates. Currently, as many as 15% of cases of autism spectrum disorder appear to be associated with a known genetic mutation, with different de novo copy number variants or de novo mutations in specific genes associated with the disorder in different families. However, even when an autism spectrum disorder is associated with a known genetic mutation, it does not appear to be fully penetrant. Risk for the remainder of cases appears to be polygenic, with perhaps hun dreds of genetic loci making relatively small contributions.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural differences will exist in norms for social interaction, nonverbal communication, and relationships, but individuals with autism spectrum disorder are markedly impaired against the norms for their cultural context. Cultural and socioeconomic factors may affect age at recognition or diagnosis; for example, in the United States, late or underdiagnosis of autism spectrum disorder among African American children may occur.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed four times more often in males than in females. In clinic samples, females tend to be more likely to show accompanying intellectual disabil ity, suggesting that girls without accompanying intellectual impairments or language delays may go unrecognized, perhaps because of subtler manifestation of social and com munication difficulties.
Functional Consequences of Autism Spectrum Disorder
In young children with autism spectrum disorder, lack of social and communication abil ities may hamper learning, especially learning through social interaction or in settings with peers. In the home, insistence on routines and aversion to change, as well as sensory sensitivities, may interfere with eating and sleeping and make routine care (e.g., haircuts, dental work) extremely difficult. Adaptive skills are typically below measured IQ. Ex treme difficulties in planning, organization, and coping with change negatively impact academic achievement, even for students with above-average intelligence. During adult hood, these individuals may have difficulties establishing independence because of con tinued rigidity and difficulty with novelty.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder, even without intellectual disability, have poor adult psychosocial functioning as indexed by measures such as independent living and gainful employment. Functional consequences in old age are unknown, but so cial isolation and communication problems (e.g., reduced help-seeking) are likely to have consequences for health in older adulthood.
Differential Diagnosis
Rett syndrome. Disruption of social interaction may be observed during the regressive phase of Rett syndrome (typically between 1-4 years of age); thus, a substantial proportion of affected young girls may have a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder. However, after this period, most individuals with Rett syndrome im prove their social communication skills, and autistic features are no longer a major area of concern. Consequently, autism spectrum disorder should be considered only when all di agnostic criteria are met.
Selective mutism. In selective mutism, early development is not typically disturbed. The affected child usually exhibits appropriate communication skills in certain contexts and settings. Even in settings where the child is mute, social reciprocity is not impaired, nor are restricted or repetitive patterns of behavior present.

58

Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Language disorders and social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In some forms of language disorder, there may be problems of communication and some secondary so cial difficulties. However, specific language disorder is not usually associated with abnor mal nonverbal communication, nor with the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities.
When an individual shows impairment in social communication and social interactions but does not show restricted and repetitive behavior or interests, criteria for social (prag matic) communication disorder, instead of autism spectrum disorder, may be met. The di agnosis of autism spectrum disorder supersedes that of social (pragmatic) communication disorder whenever the criteria for autism spectrum disorder are met, and care should be taken to enquire carefully regarding past or current restricted/repetitive behavior.
Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) without autism spectrum
disorder. Intellectual disability without autism spectrum disorder may be difficult to differentiate from autism spectrum disorder in very young children. Individuals with in tellectual disability who have not developed language or symbolic skills also present a challenge for differential diagnosis, since repetitive behavior often occurs in such individ uals as well. A diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in an individual with intellectual disability is appropriate when social communication and interaction are significantly im paired relative to the developmental level of the individual's nonverbal skills (e.g., fine motor skills, nonverbal problem solving). In contrast, intellectual disability is the appropri ate diagnosis when there is no apparent discrepancy between the level of social-commu nicative skills and other intellectual skills.
Stereotypic movement disorder. Motor stereotypies are among the diagnostic charac teristics of autism spectrum disorder, so an additional diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not given when such repetitive behaviors are better explained by the presence of autism spectrum disorder. However, when stereotypies cause self-injury and become a focus of treatment, both diagnoses may be appropriate.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Abnormalities of attention (overly focused or easily distracted) are common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as is hy peractivity. A diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) should be considered when attentional difficulties or hyperactivity exceeds that typically seen in in dividuals of comparable mental age.
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after a period of normal, or near normal, development. A prodromal state has been described in which so cial impairment and atypical interests and beliefs occur, which could be confused with the social deficits seen in autism spectrum disorder. Hallucinations and delusions, which are defining features of schizophrenia, are not features of autism spectrum disorder. How ever, clinicians must take into account the potential for individuals with autism spectrum disorder to be concrete in their interpretation of questions regarding the key features of schizophrenia (e.g., "Do you hear voices when no one is there?" "Yes [on the radio] ").
C o m o rb i d ity
Autism spectrum disorder is frequently associated with intellectual impairment and struc tural language disorder (i.e., an inability to comprehend and construct sentences with proper grammar), which should be noted under the relevant specifiers when applicable. Many in dividuals with autism spectrum disorder have psychiatric symptoms that do not form part of the diagnostic criteria for the disorder (about 70% of individuals with autism spectrum dis order may have one comorbid mental disorder, and 40% may have two or more comorbid mental disorders). When criteria for both ADHD and autism spectrum disorder are met, both diagnoses should be given. This same principle applies to concurrent diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder and developmental coordination disorder, anxiety disorders, depressive

Attention-DeficiVHyperactivity Disorder

59

disorders, and other comorbid diagnoses. Among individuals who are nonverbal or have language deficits, observable signs such as changes in sleep or eating and increases in chal lenging behaviorshould trigger an evaluation for anxiety or depression. Specific learning dif ficulties (literacy and numeracy) are common, as is developmental coordination disorder. Medical conditions commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder should be noted under the "associated with a known medical/genetic or environmental/acquired condition" specifier. Such medical conditions include epilepsy, sleep problems, and constipation. Avoidant-restrictive food intake disorder is a fairly frequent presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder, and extreme and narrow food preferences may persist.

46








F84.0

A.   1.   2.    3.   
 2)
B. 2  1.   2.   



55

     70% 40%                 " "    

Neurodevelopmental Disorders
The neurodevelopmental disorders are a group of conditions with onset in the
developmental period. The disorders typically manifest early in development, often before the child enters school, and are characterized by developmental deficits or differences in brain processes that produce impairments of personal, social, academic, or occupational functioning. The range of developmental deficits or differences varies from very specific limitations of learning or control of executive functions to global impairments of social skills or intellectual ability. Once thought to be categorically defined, more recent dimensional approaches to measurement of the symptoms demonstrate a range of severity, often without a very clear boundary with typical development. Diagnosis of a disorder thus requires the presence of both symptoms and impaired function.
The neurodevelopmental disorders frequently co-occur with one another; for example, individuals with autism spectrum disorder often have intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability), and many children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) also have a specific learning disorder. The neurodevelopmental disorders also frequently cooccur with other mental and behavioral disorders with onset in childhood (e.g., communication disorders and autism spectrum disorder may be associated with anxiety disorders; ADHD with oppositional defiant disorder; tics with obsessive-compulsive disorder). For some neurodevelopmental disorders, the clinical presentation includes behaviors that are more frequent or intense when compared with those of normal children of the same developmental age and gender, as well as deficits and delays in achieving expected milestones. For example, autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed only when the characteristic deficits of social communication are accompanied by excessively repetitive behaviors, restricted interests, and insistence on sameness.
Intellectual developmental disorder is characterized by deficits in general mental abilities, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience. The deficits result in impairments of adaptive functioning, such that the individual fails to meet standards of personal independence and social responsibility in one or more aspects of daily life, including communication, social participation, academic or occupational functioning, and personal independence at home or in community settings. Global developmental delay, as its name implies, is diagnosed when an individual fails to meet expected developmental milestones in several areas of intellectual functioning. The diagnosis is used for individuals younger than 5 years who are unable to undergo systematic assessments of intellectual functioning, and thus the clinical severity level cannot be reliably assessed. Intellectual developmental disorder may result from an acquired insult during the developmental period from, for example, a severe head injury, in which case a neurocognitive disorder also may be diagnosed.
The communication disorders include language disorder, speech sound disorder, social

(pragmatic) communication disorder, and childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering). The first three disorders are characterized by deficits in the development and use of language, speech, and social communication, respectively. Social communication disorder is characterized by deficits in both verbal and nonverbal communication skills that result in
36
social impairment and are not better explained by low abilities in structural language, intellectual developmental disorder, or autism spectrum disorder. Childhood-onset fluency disorder is characterized by disturbances of the normal fluency and motor production of speech, including repetitive sounds or syllables, prolongation of consonants or vowel sounds, broken words, blocking, or words produced with an excess of physical tension. Like other neurodevelopmental disorders, communication disorders begin early in life and may produce lifelong functional impairments.
Autism spectrum disorder is characterized by persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple contexts, including deficits in social reciprocity, nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction, and skills in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships. In addition to the social communication deficits, the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder requires the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Because symptoms change with development and may be masked by compensatory mechanisms, the diagnostic criteria may be met based on historical information, although the current presentation must cause significant impairment.
Within the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, individual clinical characteristics are noted through the use of specifiers (with or without accompanying intellectual impairment; with or without accompanying structural language impairment; associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental factor; associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem), as well as specifiers that describe the severity of autistic symptoms. These specifiers provide clinicians with an opportunity to individualize the diagnosis and communicate a richer clinical description of the affected individuals. For example, many individuals previously diagnosed with Asperger's disorder would now receive a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder without language or intellectual impairment.
ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder defined by impairing levels of inattention, disorganization, and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity. Inattention and disorganization entail inability to stay on task, seeming not to listen, and losing materials necessary for tasks, at levels that are inconsistent with age or developmental level. Hyperactivity-impulsivity entails overactivity, fidgeting, inability to stay seated, intruding into other people's activities, and inability to wait-- symptoms that are excessive for age or developmental level. In childhood, ADHD frequently overlaps with disorders that are often considered to be "externalizing disorders," such as oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder. ADHD often persists into adulthood, with resultant impairments of social, academic, and occupational functioning.
Specific learning disorder, as the name implies, is diagnosed when there are specific deficits in an individual's ability to perceive or process information for learning academic skills efficiently and accurately. This neurodevelopmental disorder first manifests during the years of formal schooling and is characterized by persistent and impairing difficulties with learning foundational academic skills in reading, writing, and/or math. The individual's performance of

the affected academic skills is well below average for age, or acceptable performance levels are achieved only with extraordinary effort. Specific learning disorder may occur in individuals identified as intellectually gifted and manifest only when the learning demands or assessment procedures (e.g., timed tests) pose barriers that cannot be overcome by their innate intelligence and compensatory strategies. For all individuals, specific learning disorder can produce lifelong impairments in activities dependent on the skills, including occupational performance.
The neurodevelopmental motor disorders include developmental coordination disorder, stereotypic movement disorder, and tic disorders. Developmental coordination disorder is characterized by deficits in the acquisition and execution of coordinated motor skills and is manifested by clumsiness and slowness or inaccuracy of performance of
37
motor skills that cause interference with activities of daily living. Stereotypic movement disorder is diagnosed when an individual has repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently purposeless motor behaviors, such as hand flapping, body rocking, head banging, self-biting, or hitting. The movements interfere with social, academic, or other activities. If the behaviors cause self-injury, this should be specified as part of the diagnostic description. Tic disorders are characterized by the presence of motor or vocal tics, which are sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, stereotyped motor movements or vocalizations. The duration, presumed etiology, and clinical presentation define the specific tic disorder that is diagnosed: Tourette's disorder, persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, other specified tic disorder, and unspecified tic disorder. Tourette's disorder is diagnosed when the individual has multiple motor and vocal tics that have been present for at least 1 year and that have a waxingwaning symptom course.
The use of specifiers for the neurodevelopmental disorder diagnoses enriches the clinical description of the individual's clinical course and current symptomatology. These include the following: Severity specifiers are available for intellectual developmental disorder, autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, specific learning disorder, and stereotypic movement disorder. Specifiers indicative of current symptomatology are available for ADHD, specific learning disorder, and persistent motor or vocal tic disorder. Autism spectrum disorder and stereotypic movement disorder also include the specifier "associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental factor." This specifier gives clinicians an opportunity to document factors that may have played a role in the etiology of the disorder, as well as those that might affect the clinical course.

Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism Spectrum Disorder

Diagnostic Criteria

F84.0

A. Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple contexts, as manifested by all of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity, ranging, for example, from abnormal social approach and failure of normal back-and-forth conversation; to reduced sharing of interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to

social interactions. 2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction,
ranging, for example, from poorly integrated verbal and nonverbal communication; to abnormalities in eye contact and body language or deficits in understanding and use of gestures; to a total lack of facial expressions and nonverbal communication. 3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships, ranging, for example, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts; to difficulties in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of interest in peers.
B. Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as manifested by at least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaustive; see text):
1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e.g., simple motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia, idiosyncratic phrases).
57
2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., extreme distress at small changes, difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals, need to take same route or eat same food every day).
3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively circumscribed or perseverative interests).
4. Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory aspects of the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to pain/temperature, adverse response to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, visual fascination with lights or movement).
C. Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be masked by learned strategies in later life).
D. Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of current functioning.
E. These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) or global developmental delay. Intellectual developmental disorder and autism spectrum disorder frequently co-occur; to make comorbid diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder and intellectual developmental disorder, social communication should be below that expected for general developmental level.
Note: Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder, Asperger's disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified

should be given the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have marked deficits in social communication, but whose symptoms do not otherwise meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder, should be evaluated for social (pragmatic) communication disorder. Specify current severity based on social communication impairments and restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior (see Table 2):
Requiring very substantial support
Requiring substantial support
Requiring support
Specify if: With or without accompanying intellectual impairment
With or without accompanying language impairment
Specify if: Associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental factor (Coding note: Use additional code to identify the associated genetic or other medical condition.)
Associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem
Specify if: With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder, p. 135, for definition) (Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.)

58

TABLE 2 Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder (examples of level of support needs)

Severity level

Social communication

Restricted, repetitive behaviors

Level 3 "Requiring very substantial
support"
Level 2 "Requiring substantial
support"

Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty

communication skills cause severe impairments coping with change, or other

in functioning, very limited initiation of social restricted/repetitive behaviors markedly

interactions, and minimal response to social

interfere with functioning in all spheres.

overtures from others. For example, a person

Great distress/difficulty changing focus or

with few words of intelligible speech who rarely action.

initiates interaction and, when he or she does,

makes unusual approaches to meet needs only

and responds to only very direct social

approaches.

Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping

communication skills; social impairments

with change, or other restricted/repetitive

apparent even with supports in place; limited

behaviors appear frequently enough to be

initiation of social interactions; and reduced or obvious to the casual observer and

abnormal responses to social overtures from

interfere with functioning in a variety of

others. For example, a person who speaks

contexts. Distress and/or difficulty

simple sentences, whose interaction is limited to changing focus or action.

narrow special interests, and who has markedly

Level 1 "Requiring support"

odd nonverbal communication.

Without supports in place, deficits in social

Inflexibility of behavior causes significant

communication cause noticeable impairments. interference with functioning in one or

Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear more contexts. Difficulty switching

examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses between activities. Problems of

to social overtures of others. May appear to

organization and planning hamper

have decreased interest in social interactions.

independence.

For example, a person who is able to speak in

full sentences and engages in communication

but whose to-and-fro conversation with others

fails, and whose attempts to make friends are

odd and typically unsuccessful.

Recording Procedures
It may be helpful to note level of support needed for each of the two core psychopathological domains in Table 2 (e.g., "requiring very substantial support for deficits in social communication and requiring substantial support for restricted, repetitive behaviors"). Specification of "with accompanying intellectual impairment" or "without accompanying
59
intellectual impairment" should be recorded next. Language impairment specification should be recorded thereafter. If there is accompanying language impairment, the current level of verbal functioning should be recorded (e.g., "with accompanying language impairment--no intelligible speech" or "with accompanying language impairment--phrase speech").
For autism spectrum disorder for which the specifiers "associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental factor" or "associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem" are appropriate, record autism spectrum disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., autism spectrum disorder associated with tuberous sclerosis complex). These specifiers apply to presentations in which the listed condition or problem is potentially relevant to the clinical care of the individual and do not necessarily indicate that the condition or problem is causally related to the autism spectrum disorder. If the associated neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem meets criteria for a neurodevelopmental or other mental disorder, both autism spectrum disorder and the other disorder should be diagnosed.
If catatonia is present, record separately "catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder." For more information, see criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder in the chapter "Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders."
Specifiers
The severity specifiers (see Table 2) may be used to describe succinctly the current symptomatology (which might fall below level 1), with the recognition that severity may vary by context and fluctuate over time. Severity of social communication difficulties and restricted, repetitive behaviors should be separately rated. The descriptive severity categories should not be used to determine eligibility for and provision of services. Indeed, individuals with relatively better skills overall may experience different or even greater psychosocial challenges. Thus, service needs can only be developed at an individual level and through discussion of personal priorities and targets.

Regarding the specifier "with or without accompanying intellectual impairment," understanding the (often uneven) intellectual profile of a child or adult with autism spectrum disorder is necessary for interpreting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential strengths in individuals with limited language).
To use the specifier "with or without accompanying language impairment," the current level of verbal functioning should be assessed and described. Examples of the specific descriptions for "with accompanying language impairment" might include no intelligible speech (nonverbal), single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals "without accompanying language impairment" might be further described as speaks in full sentences or has fluent speech. Since receptive language may lag behind expressive language development in autism spectrum disorder, receptive and expressive language skills should be considered separately.
The specifier "associated with a known genetic or other medical condition or environmental factor" can be applied when an individual has a known genetic condition (e.g., Rett syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a known medical condition (e.g., epilepsy), or a history of environmental exposure in utero to a known teratogen or infection (e.g., fetal valproate syndrome, fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal rubella). This specifier should not be viewed as synonymous with causation of autism spectrum disorder. A condition may be listed as being associated with autism spectrum disorder when it is thought to be potentially clinically relevant or inform care and not because the clinician is asserting a cause. Examples include autism spectrum disorder associated with a unique genomic copy number variant that could be clinically relevant even if the specific abnormality may not have directly caused nor have previously been linked to autism spectrum disorder, or Crohn's disease, which could exacerbate behavioral symptoms.
60
The specifier "associated with a neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral problem" can be applied to indicate problems (e.g., irritability, sleep problems, self-injurious behavior, or developmental regression) that contribute to the functional formulation or are a focus of treatment. Additional neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorders should also be noted as separate diagnoses (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; developmental coordination disorder; disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or bipolar disorders; tics or Tourette's disorder; feeding, elimination, or sleep disorders).
Catatonia can occur as a comorbid condition with autism spectrum disorder. In addition to classic symptoms of posturing, negativism (opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli), mutism, and stupor, an increase or worsening of stereotypy and self-injurious behavior may form part of the symptom complex of catatonia in the setting of autism spectrum disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of autism spectrum disorder are persistent impairment in reciprocal social communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from early childhood and limit or impair everyday functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at which functional impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of the individual and his or

her environment. Core diagnostic features are evident in the developmental period, but intervention, compensation, and current supports may mask difficulties in at least some contexts. Manifestations of the disorder also vary greatly depending on the severity of the autistic condition, developmental level, chronological age, and possibly gender; hence, the term spectrum. Individuals without cognitive or language impairment may have more subtle manifestation of deficits (e.g., Criterion A, Criterion B) than individuals with accompanying intellectual or language impairments and may be making great efforts to mask these deficits. Criterion A deficits in social communication will be more subtle if an individual has better overall communication skills (e.g., is verbally fluent, does not have intellectual impairments). Similarly, Criterion B deficits (i.e., restricted patterns of behavior and interests) may be less obvious if the interests are closer to age-typical norms (e.g., Ancient Egypt or trains as compared to wiggling a string). Autism spectrum disorder encompasses disorders previously referred to as early infantile autism, childhood autism, Kanner's autism, high-functioning autism, atypical autism, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, childhood disintegrative disorder, and Asperger's disorder.
The impairments in social communication and social interaction specified in Criterion A are pervasive and sustained. Diagnoses are most valid and reliable when based on multiple sources of information, including clinician's observations, caregiver history, and, when possible, selfreport. Verbal and nonverbal deficits in social communication have varying manifestations, depending on the individual's age, intellectual level, and language ability, as well as other factors such as treatment history and current support. Many individuals have language deficits, ranging from complete lack of speech through language delays, poor comprehension of speech, echoed speech, or stilted and overly literal language. Even when formal language skills (e.g., vocabulary, grammar) are intact, the use of language for reciprocal social communication is impaired in autism spectrum disorder.
Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity (i.e., the ability to engage with others and share thoughts and feelings) may be shown, for example, in young children with little or no initiation of social interaction and no sharing of emotions, along with reduced or absent imitation of others' behavior. What language exists is often one-sided, lacking in social reciprocity, and used to request or label rather than to comment, share feelings, or converse. In older children and adults without intellectual impairments or language delays, deficits in
61
social-emotional reciprocity may be most apparent in difficulties processing and responding to complex social cues (e.g., when and how to join a conversation, what not to say). Individuals who have developed compensation strategies for some social challenges still struggle in novel or unsupported situations and suffer from the effort and anxiety of consciously calculating what is socially intuitive for most individuals. This behavior may contribute to lower ascertainment of autism spectrum disorder in these individuals, perhaps especially in adult women. Thus, longer assessments, observation in naturalistic settings, and inquiring about any tolls of social interaction may be needed. If asked about the costs of social interaction, for example, these individuals might respond that social interactions are exhausting for them, that they are unable to concentrate because of the mental effort in monitoring social conventions, that their self-esteem is adversely affected by being unable to be themselves, and so forth.

Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction are manifested by absent, reduced, or atypical use of eye contact (relative to cultural norms), gestures, facial expressions, body orientation, or speech intonation. An early feature of autism spectrum disorder is impaired joint attention as manifested by a lack of pointing, showing, or bringing objects to share interest with others, or failure to follow someone's pointing or eye gaze. Individuals may learn a few functional gestures, but their repertoire is smaller than that of others, and they often fail to use expressive gestures spontaneously in communication. Among young people and adults with fluent language, the difficulty in coordinating nonverbal communication with speech may give the impression of odd, wooden, or exaggerated "body language" during interactions. Impairment may be relatively subtle within individual modes (e.g., someone may have relatively good eye contact when speaking) but noticeable in poor integration of eye contact, gesture, body posture, prosody, and facial expression for social communication, or in difficulty maintaining these for sustained periods or when under stress.
Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships should be judged against norms for age, gender, and culture. There may be absent, reduced, or atypical social interest, manifested by rejection of others, passivity, or inappropriate approaches that seem aggressive or disruptive. These difficulties are particularly evident in young children, in whom there is often a lack of shared social play and imagination (e.g., age-appropriate flexible pretend play) and, later, insistence on playing by very fixed rules. Older individuals may struggle to understand what behavior is considered appropriate in one situation but not another (e.g., casual behavior during a job interview), or the different ways that language may be used to communicate (e.g., irony, white lies). There may be an apparent preference for solitary activities or for interacting with much younger or older people. Frequently, there is a desire to establish friendships without a complete or realistic idea of what friendship entails (e.g., one-sided friendships or friendships based solely on shared special interests). Relationships with siblings, coworkers, and caregivers are also important to consider (in terms of reciprocity).
Autism spectrum disorder is also defined by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities (as specified in Criterion B), which show a range of manifestations according to age and ability, intervention, and current supports. Stereotyped or repetitive behaviors include simple motor stereotypies (e.g., hand flapping, finger flicking), repetitive use of objects (e.g., spinning coins, lining up toys), and repetitive speech (e.g., echolalia, the delayed or immediate parroting of heard words; use of "you" when referring to self; stereotyped use of words, phrases, or prosodic patterns). Excessive adherence to routines and restricted patterns of behavior may be manifest in resistance to change (e.g., distress at apparently small changes, such as taking an alternative route to school or work; insistence on adherence to rules; rigidity of thinking) or ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., repetitive questioning, pacing a perimeter). Highly restricted, fixated interests in autism spectrum disorder tend to be abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., a toddler strongly attached to a pan or piece of string; a child preoccupied with vacuum
62
cleaners; an adult spending hours writing out timetables). Some fascinations and routines may relate to apparent hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input, manifested through extreme responses to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, fascination

with lights or spinning objects, and sometimes apparent indifference to pain, heat, or cold. Extreme reaction to or rituals involving taste, smell, texture, or appearance of food or excessive food restrictions are common and may be a presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder without intellectual or language impairments learn to suppress repetitive behavior in public. In these individuals, repetitive behaviors like rocking or finger flicking may serve an anxiolytic or self-soothing function.
Special interests may be a source of pleasure and motivation and provide avenues for education and employment later in life. Diagnostic criteria may be met when restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities were clearly present during childhood or at some time in the past, even if symptoms are no longer present.
Criterion D requires that the features must cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of current functioning. Criterion E specifies that the social communication deficits, although sometimes accompanied by intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability), are not in line with the individual's developmental level; impairments exceed difficulties expected on the basis of developmental level.
Standardized behavioral diagnostic instruments with good psychometric properties, including caregiver interviews, questionnaires and clinician observation measures, are available and can improve reliability of diagnosis over time and across clinicians. However, the symptoms of autism spectrum disorder occur as dimensions without universally accepted cutoff scores for what would constitute a disorder. Thus, the diagnosis remains a clinical one, taking all available information into account, and is not solely dictated by the score on a particular questionnaire or observation measure.
Associated Features
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder also have intellectual and/or language impairment (e.g., slow to talk, language comprehension behind production). Even those with average or high intelligence usually have an uneven profile of abilities. The gap between intellectual and adaptive functional skills is often large. It is common for individuals with autism to have theory-of-mind deficits (i.e., to have difficulty seeing the world from another person's perspective), but these are not necessarily present in all cases. Executive function deficits are also common but not specific, as are difficulties with central coherence (i.e., being able to understand context or to "see the big picture," and thus tending to overfocus on detail).
Motor deficits are often present, including odd gait, clumsiness, and other abnormal motor signs (e.g., walking on tiptoes). Self-injury (e.g., head banging, biting the wrist) may occur, and disruptive/challenging behaviors are more common in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder than other disorders, including intellectual developmental disorder. Some individuals develop catatonic-like motor behavior (slowing and "freezing" mid-action), but these are typically not of the magnitude of a catatonic episode. However, it is possible for individuals with autism spectrum disorder to experience a marked deterioration in motor symptoms and display a full catatonic episode with symptoms such as mutism, posturing, grimacing, and waxy flexibility. The risk period for comorbid catatonia appears to be greatest in the adolescent years.
Prevalence
Frequencies for autism spectrum disorder across the United States have been reported to be

between 1% and 2% of the population, with similar estimates in child and adult
63
samples. However, prevalence appears to be lower among U.S. African American (1.1%) and Latinx children (0.8%) compared with White children (1.3%), even after the effect of socioeconomic resources is taken into account. The reported prevalence of autism spectrum disorder may be affected by misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis, or underdiagnosis of individuals from some ethnoracial backgrounds. Prevalence across non-U.S. countries has approached 1% of the population (0.62% median global prevalence), without substantial variation based on geographic region or ethnicity and across child and adult samples. Globally, the male:female ratio in well-ascertained epidemiological samples appears to be 3:1, with concerns about underrecognition of autism spectrum disorder in women and girls.
Development and Course
The age and pattern of onset also should be noted for autism spectrum disorder. The behavioral features of autism spectrum disorder first become evident in early childhood, with some cases presenting a lack of interest in social interaction in the first year of life. Symptoms are typically recognized during the second year of life (age 12¡24 months) but may be seen earlier than 12 months if developmental delays are severe, or noted later than 24 months if symptoms are more subtle. The pattern of onset description might include information about early developmental delays or any losses of social or language skills. In cases where skills have been lost, parents or caregivers may give a history of a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or language skills. Typically, this would occur between ages 12 and 24 months.
Prospective studies demonstrate that in most cases the onset of autism spectrum disorder is associated with declines in critical social and communication behaviors in the first 2 years of life. Such declines in functioning are rare in other neurodevelopmental disorders and may be an especially useful indicator of the presence of autism spectrum disorder. In rare cases, there is developmental regression occurring after at least 2 years of normal development (previously described as childhood disintegrative disorder), which is much more unusual and warrants more extensive medical investigation (i.e., continuous spike and waves during slow-wave sleep syndrome and Landau-Kleffner syndrome). Often included in these encephalopathic conditions are losses of skills beyond social communication (e.g., loss of self-care, toileting, motor skills) (see also Rett syndrome in the section "Differential Diagnosis" for this disorder).
First symptoms of autism spectrum disorder frequently involve delayed language development, often accompanied by lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g., pulling individuals by the hand without any attempt to look at them), odd play patterns (e.g., carrying toys around but never playing with them), and unusual communication patterns (e.g., knowing the alphabet but not responding to own name). Deafness may be suspected but is typically ruled out. During the second year, odd and repetitive behaviors and the absence of typical play become more apparent. Since many typically developing young children have strong preferences and enjoy repetition (e.g., eating the same foods, watching the same video multiple times), distinguishing restricted and repetitive behaviors that are diagnostic of autism spectrum disorder can be difficult in preschoolers. The clinical distinction is based on the type, frequency, and intensity of the behavior (e.g., a child who daily lines up objects for hours and is very

distressed if any item is moved). Autism spectrum disorder is not a degenerative disorder, and it is typical for learning and
compensation to continue throughout life. Symptoms are often most marked in early childhood and early school years, with developmental gains typical in later childhood in at least some areas (e.g., increased interest in social interaction). A small proportion of individuals deteriorate behaviorally during adolescence, whereas most others improve. While it was once the case that only a minority of individuals with autism spectrum disorder lived and worked independently in adulthood, as diagnosis of autism spectrum
64
disorder is made more frequently in those who have superior language and intellectual abilities, more individuals are able to find a niche that matches their special interests and skills and thus are productively employed. Access to vocational rehabilitation services significantly improves competitive employment outcomes for transition-age youth with autism spectrum disorder.
In general, individuals with lower levels of impairment may be better able to function independently. However, even these individuals may remain socially naive and vulnerable, have difficulties organizing practical demands without aid, and are prone to anxiety and depression. Many adults report using compensation strategies and coping mechanisms to mask their difficulties in public but suffer from the stress and effort of maintaining a socially acceptable facade. Relatively little is known about old age in autism spectrum disorder, but higher rates of co-occurring medical conditions have been documented in the literature.
Some individuals come for first diagnosis in adulthood, perhaps prompted by the diagnosis of autism in a child in the family or a breakdown of relations at work or home. Obtaining detailed developmental history in such cases may be difficult, and it is important to consider self-reported difficulties. Where clinical observation suggests criteria are currently met, autism spectrum disorder may be diagnosed, particularly if supported by a history of poor social and communication skills in childhood. A compelling report (by parents or another relative) that the individual had ordinary and sustained reciprocal friendships and good nonverbal communication skills throughout childhood would significantly lessen the likelihood of a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder; however, ambiguous or absent developmental information in itself is not sufficient to rule out a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder.
Manifestations of the social and communication impairments and restricted/repetitive behaviors that define autism spectrum disorder are clear in the developmental period. In later life, intervention or compensation, as well as current supports, may mask these difficulties in at least some contexts. Overall, symptoms remain sufficient to cause current impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The best established prognostic factors for individual outcome within autism spectrum disorder are presence or absence of associated intellectual developmental disorder and language impairment (e.g., functional language by age 5 years is a good prognostic sign) and additional mental health problems. Epilepsy, as a comorbid diagnosis, is associated with greater intellectual disability and lower verbal ability.

Environmental. A variety of risk factors for neurodevelopmental disorders, such as advanced parental age, extreme prematurity, or in utero exposures to certain drugs or teratogens like valproic acid, may broadly contribute to risk of autism spectrum disorder. Genetic and physiological. Heritability estimates for autism spectrum disorder have ranged from 37% to higher than 90%, based on twin concordance rates, and a more recent five-country cohort estimated heritability at 80%. Currently, as many as 15% of cases of autism spectrum disorder appear to be associated with a known genetic mutation, with different de novo copy number variants or de novo mutations in specific genes associated with the disorder in different families. However, even when a known genetic mutation is associated with autism spectrum disorder, it does not appear to be fully penetrant (i.e., not all individuals with that same genetic abnormality will develop autism spectrum disorder). Risk for the majority of cases appears to be polygenic, with perhaps hundreds of genetic loci making relatively small contributions. Whether these findings apply to all racial/ethnic populations equally is unclear, given the limited inclusion of communities of color in genetic research.
65
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural differences exist in norms for social interaction, nonverbal communication, and relationships, but individuals with autism spectrum disorder are markedly impaired against the norms for their cultural context. Culture influences the perception of autistic behaviors, the perceived salience of some behaviors over others, and the expectations for child behavior and parenting practices. Considerable discrepancies are found in age at diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in children from diverse ethnoracial backgrounds; most studies find delayed diagnosis among socially oppressed ethnic and racialized children. In addition to being diagnosed later, African American children are more often misdiagnosed with adjustment or conduct disorder than are White children.
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Autism spectrum disorder is diagnosed three to four times more often in males than in females, and on average, age at diagnosis is later in females. In clinic samples, females tend to be more likely to show accompanying intellectual developmental disorder as well as epilepsy, suggesting that girls without intellectual impairments or language delays may go unrecognized, perhaps because of subtler manifestation of social and communication difficulties. In comparison with males with autism spectrum disorder, females may have better reciprocal conversation, and be more likely to share interests, to integrate verbal and nonverbal behavior, and to modify their behavior by situation, despite having similar social understanding difficulties as males. Attempting to hide or mask autistic behavior (e.g., by copying the dress, voice, and manner of socially successful women) may also make diagnosis harder in some females. Repetitive behaviors may be somewhat less evident in females than in males, on average, and special interests may have a more social (e.g., a singer, an actor) or "normative" focus (e.g., horses), while remaining unusual in their intensity. Relative to the general population, rates of gender variance have been reported to be increased in autism spectrum disorder, with higher variance in females compared with males.

Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Individuals with autism spectrum disorder are at greater risk for suicide death compared with those without autism spectrum disorder. Children with autism spectrum disorder who had impaired social communication had a higher risk of self-harm with suicidal intent, suicidal thoughts, and suicide plans by age 16 years as compared with those without impaired social communication. Adolescents and young adults with autism spectrum disorder have an increased risk of suicide attempts compared with age- and sex-matched control subjects, even after adjustments for demographic factors and psychiatric comorbidities.
Functional Consequences of Autism Spectrum Disorder
In young children with autism spectrum disorder, lack of social and communication abilities may hamper learning, especially learning through social interaction or in settings with peers. In the home, insistence on routines and aversion to change, as well as sensory sensitivities, may interfere with eating and sleeping and make routine care (e.g., haircuts, dental work) extremely difficult. Adaptive skills are typically below measured IQ. Extreme difficulties in planning, organization, and coping with change negatively impact academic achievement, even for students with above-average intelligence. During adulthood, these individuals may have difficulties establishing independence because of continued rigidity and difficulty with novelty.
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder, even without intellectual developmental disorder, have poor adult psychosocial functioning as indexed by measures such
66
as independent living and gainful employment. Functional consequences in old age are unknown, but social isolation and communication problems (e.g., reduced help-seeking) are likely to have consequences for health in older adulthood.
Co-occurring intellectual developmental disorder, epilepsy, mental disorders, and chronic medical conditions may be associated with a higher risk of premature mortality for individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Deaths from injury and poisoning are higher than for the general population, as are deaths from suicide. Drowning is the leading cause of accidental death in children with autism spectrum disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Abnormalities of attention (overly focused or easily distracted) are common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as is hyperactivity. Moreover, some individuals with ADHD may exhibit social communication deficits such as interrupting others, speaking too loudly, and not respecting personal space. Although potentially difficult to discriminate ADHD from autism spectrum disorder, the developmental course and absence of restricted, repetitive behaviors and unusual interests in ADHD help in differentiating the two conditions. A concurrent diagnosis of ADHD should be considered when attentional difficulties or hyperactivity exceeds that typically seen in individuals of comparable mental age, and ADHD is one of the most common comorbidities in autism spectrum disorder. Intellectual developmental disorder (intellectual disability) without autism spectrum disorder. Intellectual developmental disorder without autism spectrum disorder may be difficult to differentiate from

autism spectrum disorder in very young children. Individuals with intellectual developmental disorder who have not developed language or symbolic skills also present a challenge for differential diagnosis, since repetitive behavior often occurs in such individuals as well. A diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in an individual with intellectual developmental disorder is appropriate when social communication and interaction are significantly impaired relative to the developmental level of the individual's nonverbal skills (e.g., fine motor skills, nonverbal problem solving). In contrast, intellectual developmental disorder is the appropriate diagnosis when there is no apparent discrepancy between the level of social communicative skills and other intellectual skills. Language disorders and social (pragmatic) communication disorder. In some forms of language disorder, there may be problems of communication and some secondary social difficulties. However, specific language disorder is not usually associated with abnormal nonverbal communication, nor with the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities.
When an individual shows impairment in social communication and social interactions but does not show restricted and repetitive behavior or interests, criteria for social (pragmatic) communication disorder, instead of autism spectrum disorder, may be met. The diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder supersedes that of social (pragmatic) communication disorder whenever the criteria for autism spectrum disorder are met, and care should be taken to enquire carefully regarding past or current restricted/repetitive behavior.
Selective mutism. In selective mutism, early development is not typically disturbed. The affected child usually exhibits appropriate communication skills in certain contexts and settings. Even in settings where the child is mute, social reciprocity is not impaired, nor are restricted or repetitive patterns of behavior present.
Stereotypic movement disorder. Motor stereotypies are among the diagnostic characteristics of autism spectrum disorder, so an additional diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not given when such repetitive behaviors are better explained by the presence
67
of autism spectrum disorder. However, when stereotypies cause self-injury and become a focus of treatment, both diagnoses may be appropriate.
Rett syndrome. Disruption of social interaction may be observed during the regressive phase of Rett syndrome (typically between ages 1 and 4 years); thus, a substantial proportion of affected young girls may have a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder. However, after this period, most individuals with Rett syndrome improve their social communication skills, and autistic features are no longer a major area of concern. Consequently, autism spectrum disorder should be considered only when all diagnostic criteria are met.
Symptoms associated with anxiety disorders. The overlap of anxiety symptoms with the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder can make the classification of anxiety symptoms in autism spectrum disorder challenging. For example, social withdrawal and repetitive behaviors are core features of autism spectrum disorder but may also be expressions of anxiety. The most common anxiety disorders in autism spectrum disorder are specific phobia (in up to 30% of cases), and social anxiety and agoraphobia (in as many as 17% of cases).

Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Repetitive behavior is a defining feature of both obsessivecompulsive disorder and autism spectrum disorder. In both conditions, repetitive behaviors are considered to be inappropriate or odd. In obsessive-compulsive disorder, intrusive thoughts are often related to contamination, organization, or sexual or religious themes. Compulsions are performed in response to these intrusive thoughts in attempts to relieve anxiety. In autism spectrum disorder, repetitive behaviors classically include more stereotyped motor behaviors, such as hand flapping and finger shaking or more complex behaviors, such as insistence on routines or lining up objects. Contrary to obsessive-compulsive disorder, repetitive behaviors in autism spectrum disorder may be perceived as pleasurable and reinforcing.
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after a period of normal, or near normal, development. A prodromal state has been described in which social impairment and atypical interests and beliefs occur, which could be confused with the social deficits and restricted fixated interests seen in autism spectrum disorder. Hallucinations and delusions, which are defining features of schizophrenia, are not features of autism spectrum disorder. However, clinicians must take into account the potential for individuals with autism spectrum disorder to be concrete in their interpretation of questions regarding the key features of schizophrenia (e.g., "Do you hear voices when no one is there?" "Yes [on the radio]"). Autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia can co-occur, and both should be diagnosed when criteria are met.
Personality disorders. In adults without intellectual developmental disorder or significant language impairment, some behaviors associated with autism spectrum disorder may be perceived by others as symptoms of narcissistic, schizotypal, or schizoid personality disorder. Schizotypal personality disorder in particular may intersect with autism spectrum disorder in unusual preoccupations and perceptual experiences, odd thinking and speech, constricted affect and social anxiety, lack of close friends, and odd or eccentric behavior. The early developmental course of autism spectrum disorder (lack of imaginative play, restricted/repetitive behavior, sensory sensitivities) is most helpful in differentiating it from personality disorders.
Comorbidity
Autism spectrum disorder is frequently associated with intellectual developmental disorder and language disorder (i.e., an inability to comprehend and construct sentences with proper grammar). Specific learning difficulties (literacy and numeracy) are common, as is developmental coordination disorder.
68
Psychiatric comorbidities also co-occur in autism spectrum disorder. About 70% of individuals with autism spectrum disorder may have one comorbid mental disorder, and 40% may have two or more comorbid mental disorders. Anxiety disorders, depression, and ADHD are particularly common. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder is a fairly frequent presenting feature of autism spectrum disorder, and extreme and narrow food preferences may persist.
Among individuals who are nonverbal or have language deficits, observable signs such as changes in sleep or eating and increases in challenging behavior should trigger an evaluation for anxiety or depression, as well as for potential pain or discomfort from undiagnosed medical or dental problems. Medical conditions commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder include epilepsy and constipation.

    1
             "   "   
0: F70 F71 F72 F73
37

F80ÀÀFS9 

 (a)  Cb)  
 (c)                
           
À 185 À

F80-F89 
F84 
           5        
      X        F70-F79    F84. 0 
 3    3-4 
 3    
À 197À

ICD11

https://icd.who.int/browse/2024-01/mms/en#437815624

1
1

6AOZ 

 8A050. 3  3
8A050. 0 Tourette 8A050. 1  8A05.02 

 "

    

2

1. 
1
6A02 
        0  0 
 0  o   0  28

1. 
1   
        
  Tourette 
         
 2   3   Landau-Kleffner        
         
36

